CHAPTER I.


Maria Alexandrovna Moskaleva was the principal lady of Mordasoff—there was
no doubt whatever on that point! She always bore herself as though _she_
did not care a fig for anyone, but as though no one else could do without
_her_. True, there were uncommonly few who loved her—in fact I may say
that very many detested her; still, everyone was afraid of her, and that
was what she liked!

Now, why did Maria Alexandrovna, who dearly loves scandal, and cannot
sleep at night unless she has heard something new and piquant the day
before,—why, or how did she know how to bear herself so that it would
never strike anyone, looking at her, to suppose that the dignified lady
was the most inveterate scandal-monger in the world—or at all events in
Mordasoff? On the contrary, anyone would have said at once, that scandals
and such-like pettiness must vanish in her presence; and that
scandal-mongers, caught red-handed by Maria Alexandrovna, would blush and
tremble, like schoolboys at the entrance of the master; and that the talk
would immediately be diverted into channels of the loftiest and most
sublime subjects so soon as she entered the room. Maria Alexandrovna knew
many deadly and scandalous secrets of certain other Mordasoff inhabitants,
which, if she liked to reveal them at any convenient opportunity, would
produce results little less terrible than the earthquake of Lisbon. Still,
she was very quiet about the secrets she knew, and never let them out
except in cases of absolute need, and then only to her nearest and dearest
friends. She liked to hint that she knew certain things, and frighten
people out of their wits; preferring to keep them in a state of perpetual
terror, rather than crush them altogether.

This was real talent—the talent of tactics.

We all considered Maria Alexandrovna as our type and model of
irreproachable _comme-il-faut_! She had no rival in this respect in
Mordasoff! She could kill and annihilate and pulverize any rival with a
single word. We have seen her do it; and all the while she would look as
though she had not even observed that she had let the fatal word fall.

Everyone knows that this trait is a speciality of the highest circles.

Her circle of friends was large. Many visitors to Mordasoff left the town
again in an ecstasy over her reception of them, and carried on a
correspondence with her afterwards! Somebody even addressed some poetry to
her, which she showed about the place with great pride. The novelist who
came to the town used to read his novel to her of an evening, and ended by
dedicating it to her; which produced a very agreeable effect. A certain
German professor, who came from Carlsbad to inquire into the question of a
little worm with horns which abounds in our part of the world, and who
wrote and published four large quarto volumes about this same little
insect, was so delighted and ravished with her amiability and kindness
that to this very day he carries on a most improving correspondence upon
moral subjects from far Carlsbad!

Some people have compared Maria Alexandrovna, in certain respects, with
Napoleon. Of course it may have been her enemies who did so, in order to
bring Maria Alexandrovna to scorn; but all I can say is, How is it that
Napoleon, when he rose to his highest, that _too_ high estate of his,
became giddy and fell? Historians of the old school have ascribed this to
the fact that he was not only not of royal blood, but was not even a
gentleman! and therefore when he rose too high, he thought of his proper
place, the ground, became giddy and fell! But why did not Maria
Alexandrovna’s head whirl? And how was it that she could always keep her
place as the first lady of Mordasoff?

People have often said this sort of thing of Maria Alexandrovna; for
instance: “Oh—yes, but how would she act under such and such difficult
circumstances?” Yet, when the circumstances arose, Maria Alexandrovna
invariably rose also to the emergency! For instance, when her
husband—Afanassy Matveyevitch—was obliged to throw up his appointment, out
of pure incapacity and feebleness of intellect, just before the government
inspector came down to look into matters, all Mordasoff danced with
delight to think that she would be down on her knees to this inspector,
begging and beseeching and weeping and praying—in fact, that she would
drop her wings and fall; but, bless you, nothing of the sort happened!
Maria Alexandrovna quite understood that her husband was beyond praying
for: he must retire. So she only rearranged her affairs a little, in such
a manner that she lost not a scrap of her influence in the place, and her
house still remained the acknowledged head of all Mordasoff Society!

The procurer’s wife, Anna Nicolaevna Antipova, the sworn foe of Maria
Alexandrovna, though a friend so far as could be judged outside, had
already blown the trumpet of victory over her rival! But when Society
found that Maria Alexandrovna was extremely difficult to put down, they
were obliged to conclude that the latter had struck her roots far deeper
than they had thought for.

As I have mentioned Afanassy Matveyevitch, Maria Alexandrovna’s husband, I
may as well add a few words about him in this place.

Firstly, then, he was a most presentable man, so far as exterior goes, and
a very high-principled person besides; but in critical moments he used to
lose his head and stand looking like a sheep which has come across a new
gate. He looked very majestic and dignified in his dress-coat and white
tie at dinner parties, and so on; but his dignity only lasted until he
opened his mouth to speak; for then—well, you’d better have shut your
ears, ladies and gentlemen, when he began to talk—that’s all! Everyone
agreed that he was quite unworthy to be Maria Alexandrovna’s husband. He
only sat in his place by virtue of his wife’s genius. In my humble opinion
he ought long ago to have been derogated to the office of frightening
sparrows in the kitchen garden. There, and only there, would he have been
in his proper sphere, and doing some good to his fellow countrymen.

Therefore, I think Maria Alexandrovna did a very wise thing when she sent
him away to her village, about a couple of miles from town, where she
possessed a property of some hundred and twenty souls—which, to tell the
truth, was all she had to keep up the respectability and grandeur of her
noble house upon!

Everybody knew that Afanassy was only kept because he had earned a salary
and perquisites; so that when he ceased to earn the said salary and
perquisites, it surprised no-one to learn that he was sent away—“returned
empty” to the village, as useless and fit for nothing! In fact, everyone
praised his wife for her soundness of judgment and decision of character!

Afanassy lived in clover at the village. I called on him there once and
spent a very pleasant hour. He tied on his white ties, cleaned his boots
himself (not because he had no-one to do it for him, but for the sake of
art, for he loved to have them _shine_), went to the bath as often as he
could, had tea four times a day, and was as contented as possible.

Do you remember, a year and a half ago, the dreadful stories that were
afoot about Zenaida, Maria Alexandrovna’s and Afanassy’s daughter? Zenaida
was undoubtedly a fine, handsome, well-educated girl; but she was now
twenty-three years old, and not married yet. Among the reasons put forth
for Zenaida being still a maid, one of the strongest was those dark
rumours about a strange attachment, a year and a half ago, with the
schoolmaster of the place—rumours not hushed up even to this day. Yes, to
this very day they tell of a love-letter, written by Zina, as she was
called, and handed all about Mordasoff. But kindly tell me, who ever saw
this letter? If it went from hand to hand what became of it? Everyone
seems to have heard of it, but no one ever saw it! At all events, _I_ have
never met anyone who actually saw the letter with his own eyes. If you
drop a hint to Maria Alexandrovna about it, she simply does not understand
you.

Well, supposing that there _was_ something, and that Zina did write such a
letter; what dexterity and skill of Maria Alexandrovna, to have so ably
nipped the bud of the scandal! I feel sure that Zina _did_ write the
letter; but Maria Alexandrovna has managed so well that there is not a
trace, not a shred of evidence of the existence of it. Goodness knows how
she must have worked and planned to save the reputation of this only
daughter of hers; but she managed it somehow.

As for Zina not having married, there’s nothing surprising in that. Why,
what sort of a husband could be found for her in Mordasoff? Zina ought to
marry a reigning prince, if anyone! Did you ever see such a beauty among
beauties as Zina? I think not. Of course, she was very proud—too proud.

There was Mosgliakoff—some people said she was likely to end by marrying
_him_; but I never thought so. Why, what was there in Mosgliakoff? True,
he was young and good looking, and possessed an estate of a hundred and
fifty souls, and was a Petersburg swell; but, in the first place, I don’t
think there was much inside his head. He was such a funny, new-idea sort
of man. Besides, what is an estate of a hundred and fifty souls, according
to present notions? Oh, no; that’s a marriage that never could come off.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

There, kind reader, all you have just read was written by me some five
months ago, for my own amusement. I admit, I am rather partial to Maria
Alexandrovna; and I wished to write some sort of laudatory account of that
charming woman, and to mould it into the form of one of those playful
“letters to a friend,” purporting to have been written in the old golden
days (which will never return—thank Heaven!) to one of the periodicals of
the time, “The Northern Bee,” or some such paper. But since I have no
“friend,” and since I am, besides, naturally of a timid disposition, and
especially so as to my literary efforts, the essay remained on my
writing-table, as a memorial of my early literary attempts and in memory
of the peaceful occupation of a moment or two of leisure.

Well, five months have gone by, and lo! great things have happened at
Mordasoff!

Prince K—— drove into the town at an early hour one fine morning, and put
up at Maria Alexandrovna’s house! The prince only stayed three days, but
his visit proved pregnant with the most fatal consequences. I will say
more—the prince brought about what was, in a certain sense, a revolution
in the town, an account of which revolution will, of course, comprise some
of the most important events that have ever happened in Mordasoff; and I
have determined at last, after many heart-sinkings and flutterings, and
much doubt, to arrange the story into the orthodox literary form of a
novel, and present it to the indulgent Public! My tale will include a
narrative of the Rise and Greatness and Triumphant Fall of Maria
Alexandrovna, and of all her House in Mordasoff, a theme both worthy of,
and attractive to any writer!

Of course I must first explain why there should have been anything
extraordinary in the fact that Prince K—— came to Mordasoff, and put up at
Maria Alexandrovna’s mansion. And in order to do this, I must first be
allowed to say a few words about this same Prince K——. This I shall now
do. A short biography of the nobleman is absolutely necessary to the
further working out of my story. So, reader, you must excuse me.





CHAPTER II.


I will begin, then, by stating that Prince K—— was not so very, very old,
although, to look at him, you would think he _must_ fall to pieces every
moment, so decayed, or rather, worn-out was he. At Mordasoff all sorts of
strange things were told of him. Some declared that the old prince’s wits
had forsaken him. All agreed that it was passing strange that the owner of
a magnificent property of four thousand souls, a man of rank, and one who
could have, if he liked, a great influence, and play a great part in his
country’s affairs; that such a man should live all alone upon his estate,
and make an absolute hermit of himself, as did Prince K——. Many who had
known him a few years before insisted upon it that he was very far from
loving solitude then, and was as unlike a hermit as anyone could possibly
be.

However, here is all I have been able to learn authentically as to his
antecedents, etc.:—

Some time or other, in his younger days—which must have been a mighty long
while ago,—the prince made a most brilliant entry into life. He knocked
about and enjoyed himself, and sang romantic songs, and wrote epigrams,
and led a fast life generally, very often abroad, and was full of gifts
and intellectual capacity.

Of course he very soon ran through his means, and when old age approached,
he suddenly found himself almost penniless. Somebody recommended him to
betake himself to his country seat, which was about to be sold by public
auction. So off he went with that intention; but called in at Mordasoff,
and stopped there six months. He liked this provincial life, and while in
our town he spent every farthing he had left in the world, continuing his
reckless life as of old, galivanting about, and forming intimacies with
half the ladies of Mordasoff.

He was a kind-hearted, good sort of a man, but, of course, not without
certain princely failings, which, however, were accounted here to be
nothing but evidences of the highest breeding, and for this reason caused
a good effect instead of aversion. The ladies, especially, were in a state
of perpetual ecstasy over their dear guest. They cherished the fondest and
tenderest recollections of him. There were also strange traditions and
rumours about the prince. It was said that he spent more than half the day
at his toilet table; and that he was, in fact, made up of all sorts of
little bits. No one could say when or how he had managed to fall to pieces
so completely.

He wore a wig, whiskers, moustache, and even an “espagnole,” all false to
a hair, and of a lovely raven black; besides which he painted and rouged
every day. It was even said that he managed to do away with his wrinkles
by means of _hidden springs_—hidden somehow in his wig. It was said,
further, that he wore stays, in consequence of the want of a rib which he
had lost in Italy, through being caused to fly, involuntarily, out of a
window during a certain love affair. He limped with his left foot, and it
was whispered that the said foot was a cork one—a very scientific member,
made for him in place of the real one which came to grief during another
love affair, in Paris this time. But what will not people say? At all
events, I know for a fact that his right eye was a glass one; beautifully
made, I confess, but still—glass. His teeth were false too.

For whole days at a time he used to wash himself in all sorts of patent
waters and scents and pomades.

However, no one could deny that even then he was beginning to indulge in
senile drivel and chatter. It appeared his career was about over; he had
seen his best days, everyone knew that he had not a copeck left in the
world!

Then, suddenly and unexpectedly, an old relative of his—who had always
lived in Paris, but from whom he never had had the slightest hope of
inheritance—died, after having buried her legal heir exactly a month
before! The prince, to his utter astonishment, turned out to be the next
heir, and a beautiful property of four thousand serfs, just forty miles
from Mordasoff, became his—absolutely and unquestionably!

He immediately started off to Petersburg, to see to his affairs. Before he
departed, however, the ladies of our town gave him a magnificent
subscription banquet. They tell how bewitching and delightful the prince
was at this last dinner; how he punned and joked and told the most
_unusual_ stories; and how he promised to come to Donchanovo (his new
property) very soon, and gave his word that on his arrival he would give
endless balls and garden parties and picnics and fireworks and
entertainments of all kinds, for his friends here.

For a whole year after his departure, the ladies of the place talked of
nothing but these promised festivities; and awaited the arrival of the
“dear old man” with the utmost impatience. At last the prince arrived; but
to the disappointment and astonishment of everyone, he did not even call
in at Mordasoff on the way; and on his arrival at Donchanovo he shut
himself up there, as I have expressed it before, like a very hermit.

All sorts of fantastic rumours were bruited about, and from this time the
prince’s life and history became most secret, mysterious, and
incomprehensible.

In the first place, it was declared that the prince had not been very
successful in St. Petersburg; that many of his relations—future heirs and
heirs presumptive, and so on, had wished to put the Prince under some kind
of restraint, on the plea of “feebleness of intellect;” probably fearing
that he would run through this property as he had done with the last! And
more, some of them went so far as to suggest that he should be popped into
a lunatic asylum; and he was only saved by the interference of one of the
nearest of kin, who pointed out that the poor old prince was more than
half dead already, and that the rest of him must inevitably soon die too;
and that then the property would come down to them safely enough without
the need of the lunatic asylum. I repeat, what will not people say?
Especially at our place, Mordasoff! All this, it was said, had frightened
the prince dreadfully; so that his nature seemed to change entirely, and
he came down to live a hermit life at Donchanovo.

Some of our Mordasoff folk went over to welcome him on his arrival; but
they were either not received at all or received in the strangest fashion.
The prince did not recognise his old friends: many people explained that
he did not _wish_ to recognise them. Among other visitors to Donchanovo
was the Governor.

On the return of the latter from his visit, he declared that the prince
was undoubtedly a little “off his head.” The Governor always made a face
if anyone reminded him of this visit of his to Donchanovo. The ladies were
dreadfully offended.

At last an important fact was revealed: namely, that there was with the
prince, and apparently in authority over him, some unknown person of the
name of Stepanida Matveyevna, who had come down with him from St.
Petersburg; an elderly fat woman in a calico dress, who went about with
the house-keys in her hand; and that the prince obeyed this woman like a
little child, and did not dare take a step without her leave; that she
washed him and dressed him and soothed and petted him just like a nurse
with a baby; and lastly, that she kept all visitors away from him, even
relations—who, little by little, had begun to pervade the place rather too
frequently, for the purpose of seeing that all was right.

It was said that this person managed not only the prince, but his estate
too: she turned off bailiffs and clerks, she encashed the rents, she
looked after things in general—and did it well, too; so that the peasants
blessed their fate under her rule.

As for the prince, it was rumoured that he spent his days now almost
entirely at his toilet-table, trying on wigs and dress-coats, and that the
rest of his time was spent playing cards and games with Stepanida
Matveyevna, and riding on a quiet old English mare. On such occasions his
nurse always accompanied him in a covered droshky, because the prince
liked to ride out of bravado, but was most unsafe in his saddle.

He had been seen on foot too, in a long great coat and a straw hat with a
wide brim; a pink silk lady’s tie round his neck, and a basket on his arm
for mushrooms and flowers and berries, and so on, which he collected. The
nurse accompanied him, and a few yards behind walked a manservant, while a
carriage was in attendance on the high road at the side. When any peasant
happened to meet him, and with low bow, and hat in hand, said, “Good
morning, your highness—our beloved Sun, and Father of us all,” or some
such Russian greeting, he would stick his eye-glass in his eye, nod his
head and say, with great urbanity, and in French, “Bon jour, mon ami, bon
jour!”

Lots of other rumours there were—in fact, our folks could not forget that
the prince lived so near them.

What, then, must have been the general amazement when one fine day it was
trumpeted abroad that the prince—their curious old hermit-prince, had
arrived at Mordasoff, and put up at Maria Alexandrovna’s house!

Agitation and bewilderment were the order of the day; everybody waited for
explanations, and asked one another what could be the meaning of this
mystery? Some proposed to go and see for themselves; all agreed that it
was _most_ extraordinary. The ladies wrote notes to each other, came and
whispered to one another, and sent their maids and husbands to find out
more.

What was particularly strange was, why had the prince put up at Maria
Alexandrovna’s, and not somewhere else? This fact annoyed everyone; but,
most of all, Mrs. Antipova, who happened to be a distant relative of the
prince.

However, in order to clear up all these mysteries and find an answer to
all these questions, we must ourselves go and see Maria Alexandrovna. Will
you follow me in, kind reader? It is only ten in the morning, certainly,
as you point out; but I daresay she will receive such intimate friends,
all the same. Oh, yes; she’ll see us all right.





CHAPTER III.


It is ten o’clock in the morning, and we are at Maria Alexandrovna’s, and
in that room which the mistress calls her “salon” on great occasions; she
has a boudoir besides.

In this salon the walls are prettily papered, and the floor is nicely
painted; the furniture is mostly red; there is a fireplace, and on the
mantelpiece a bronze clock with some figure—a Cupid—upon it, in dreadfully
bad taste. There are large looking-glasses between the windows. Against
the back wall there stands a magnificent grand piano—Zina’s—for Zina is a
musician. On a table in the middle of the room hisses a silver tea-urn,
with a very pretty tea-set alongside of it.

There is a lady pouring out tea, a distant relative of the family, and
living with Maria Alexandrovna in that capacity, one Nastasia Petrovna
Ziablova. She is a widow of over thirty, a brunette with a fresh-looking
face and lively black eyes, not at all bad looking.

She is of a very animated disposition, laughs a great deal, is fond of
scandal, of course; and can manage her own little affairs very nicely. She
has two children somewhere, being educated. She would much like to marry
again. Her last husband was a military man.

Maria Alexandrovna herself is sitting at the fire in a very benign frame
of mind; she is dressed in a pale-green dress, which becomes her very
well; she is unspeakably delighted at the arrival of the Prince, who, at
this moment, is sitting upstairs, at his toilet table. She is so happy,
that she does not even attempt to conceal her joy. A young man is standing
before her and relating something in an animated way; one can see in his
eyes that he wishes to curry favour with his listener.

This young fellow is about twenty-five years old, and his manners are
decidedly good, though he has a silly way of going into raptures, and has,
besides, a good deal too much of the “funny man” about him. He is well
dressed and his hair is light; he is not a bad-looking fellow. But we have
already heard of this gentleman: he is Mr. Mosgliakoff. Maria Alexandrovna
considers him rather a stupid sort of a man, but receives him very well.
He is an aspirant for the hand of her daughter Zina, whom, according to
his own account, he loves to distraction. In his conversation, he refers
to Zina every other minute, and does his best to bring a smile to her lips
by his witty remarks; but the girl is evidently very cool and indifferent
with him. At this moment she is standing away at the side near the piano,
turning over the leaves of some book.

This girl is one of those women who create a sensation amounting almost to
amazement when they appear in society. She is lovely to an almost
impossible extent, a brunette with splendid black eyes, a grand figure and
divine bust. Her shoulders and arms are like an antique statue; her gait
that of an empress. She is a little pale to-day; but her lips, with the
gleam of her pearly teeth between them, are things to dream of, if you
once get a sight of them. Her expression is severe and serious.

Mr. Mosgliakoff is evidently afraid of her intent gaze; at all events, he
seems to cower before her when she looks at him. She is very simply
dressed, in a white muslin frock—the white suits her admirably. But then,
_everything_ suits her! On her finger is a hair ring: it does not look as
though the hair was her mother’s, from the colour. Mosgliakoff has never
dared to ask her whose hair it is. This morning she seems to be in a
peculiarly depressed humour; she appears to be very much preoccupied and
silent: but her mother is quite ready to talk enough for both; albeit she
glances continually at Zina, as though anxious for her, but timidly, too,
as if afraid of her.

“I am _so_ pleased, Pavel Alexandrovitch,” she chirps to Mosgliakoff;
“_so_ happy, that I feel inclined to cry the news out of the window to
every passer-by. Not to speak of the delightful surprise—to both Zina and
myself—of seeing you a whole fortnight sooner than we expected you—that,
of course, ‘goes without saying’; but I am so, _so_ pleased that you
should have brought this dear prince with you. You don’t know how I love
that fascinating old man. No, no! You would never believe it. You young
people don’t understand this sort of rapture; you never would believe me,
assure you as much as ever I pleased.

“Don’t you remember, Zina, how much he was to me at that time—six years
ago? Why, I was his guide, his sister, his mother! There was something
delightfully ingenuous and ennobling in our intimacy—one might say
_pastoral_; I don’t know what to call it—it was delightful. That is why
the poor dear prince thinks of _my_ house, and only mine, with gratitude,
now. Do you know, Pavel Alexandrovitch, perhaps you have _saved_ him by
thus bringing him to me? I have thought of him with quaking of heart all
these six years—you’d hardly believe it,—and _dreamed_ of him, too. They
say that wretch of a woman has bewitched and ruined him; but you’ve got
him out of the net at last. We must make the best of our opportunity now,
and save him outright. Do tell me again, how did you manage it? Describe
your meeting and all in detail; I only heard the chief point of the story
just now, and I do so like details. So, he’s still at his toilet table
now, is he?—”

“Yes. It was all just as I told you, Maria Alexandrovna!” begins
Mosgliakoff readily—delighted to repeat his story ten times over, if
required—“I had driven all night, and not slept a wink. You can imagine
what a hurry I was in to arrive here,” he adds, turning to Zina; “in a
word, I swore at the driver, yelled for fresh horses, kicked up a row at
every post station: my adventures would fill a volume. Well, exactly at
six o’clock in the morning I arrived at the last station, Igishova.
‘Horses, horses!’ I shouted, ‘let’s have fresh horses quick; I’m not going
to get out.’ I frightened the post-station man’s wife out of her wits; she
had a small baby in her arms, and I have an idea that its mother’s fright
will affect said baby’s supply of the needful. Well, the sunrise was
splendid—fine frosty morning—lovely! but I hadn’t time to look at
anything. I got my horses—I had to deprive some other traveller of his
pair; he was a professor, and we nearly fought a duel about it.

“They told me some prince had driven off a quarter of an hour ago. He had
slept here, and was driving his own horses; but I didn’t attend to
anything. Well, just seven miles from town, at a turn of the road, I saw
that some surprising event had happened. A huge travelling carriage was
lying on its side; the coachman and two flunkeys stood outside it,
apparently dazed, while from inside the carriage came heart-rending
lamentations and cries. I thought I’d pass by and let them all be—; it was
no affair of mine: but humanity insisted, and would not take a denial. (I
think it is Heine says that humanity shoves its nose in everywhere!) So I
stopped; and my driver and myself, with the other fellows, lifted the
carriage on to its legs again, or perhaps I should say wheels, as it had
no legs.

“I thought to myself, ‘This is that very prince they mentioned!’ So, I
looked in. Good Heavens! it was our prince! Here was a meeting, if you
like! I yelled at him, ‘Prince—uncle!’ Of course he hardly knew me at the
first glance, but he very soon recognised me. At least, I don’t believe he
knows who I am really, even _now_; I think he takes me for someone else,
not a relation. I saw him last seven years ago, as a boy; I remember
_him_, because he struck me so; but how was he to remember _me_? At all
events, I told him my name, and he embraced me ecstatically; and all the
while he himself was crying and trembling with fright. He really was
_crying_, I’ll take my oath he was! I saw it with my own eyes.

“Well, we talked a bit, and at last I persuaded him to get into my trap
with me, and call in at Mordasoff, if only for one day, to rest and
compose his feelings. He told me that Stepanida Matveyevna had had a
letter from Moscow, saying that her father, or daughter, or both, with all
her family, were dying; and that she had wavered for a long time, and at
last determined to go away for ten days. The prince sat out one day, and
then another, and then a third, measuring wigs, and powdering and pomading
himself; then he grew sick of it, and determined to go and see an old
friend, a priest called Misael, who lived at the Svetozersk Hermitage.
Some of the household, being afraid of the great Stepanida’s wrath,
opposed the prince’s proposed journey; but the latter insisted, and
started last night after dinner. He slept at Igishova, and went off this
morning again, at sunrise. Just at the turn going down to the Reverend Mr.
Misael’s, the carriage went over, and the prince was very nearly shot down
the ravine.”

“Then I step in and save the prince, and persuade him to come and pay a
visit to our mutual friend, Maria Alexandrovna (of whom the prince told me
that she is the most delightful and charming woman he has ever known). And
so here we are, and the prince is now upstairs attending to his wigs and
so on, with the help of his valet, whom he took along with him, and whom
he always would and will take with him wherever he goes; because he would
sooner die than appear before ladies without certain little secret touches
which require the valet’s hand. There you are, that’s the whole story.”

“Why, what a humourist he is, isn’t he, Zina?” said the lady of the house.
"How beautifully you told the story! Now, listen, Paul: one question;
explain to me clearly how you are related to the prince; you call him
uncle!"

“I really don’t know, Maria Alexandrovna; seventh, cousin I think, or
something of that sort. My aunt knows all about it; it was she who made me
go down to see him at Donchanova, when I got kicked out by Stepanida! I
simply call him ‘uncle,’ and he answers me; that’s about all our
relationship.”

“Well, I repeat, it was Providence that made you bring him straight to my
house as you did. I tremble to think of what might have happened to the
poor dear prince if somebody else, and not I, had got hold of him! Why,
they’d have torn him to pieces among them, and picked his bones! They’d
have pounced on him as on a new-found mine; they might easily have robbed
him; they are capable of it. You have no idea, Paul, of the depth of
meanness and greediness to which the people of this place have fallen!”

“But, my dear good Maria Alexandrovna—as if he would ever _think_ of
bringing him anywhere but to yourself,” said the widow, pouring out a cup
of tea; “you don’t suppose he would have taken the prince to Mrs.
Antipova’s, surely, do you?”

“Dear me, how very long he is coming out,” said Maria Alexandrovna,
impatiently rising from her chair; “it really is quite strange!”

“Strange! what, of uncle? Oh dear, no! he’ll probably be another five
hours or so putting himself together; besides, since he has no memory
whatever, he has very likely quite forgotten that he has come to your
house! Why, he’s a most extraordinary man, Maria Alexandrovna.”

“Oh don’t, don’t! Don’t talk like that!”

“Why not, Maria Alexandrovna? He is a lump of composition, not a man at
all! Remember, you haven’t seen him for six years, and I saw him half an
hour ago. He is half a corpse; he’s only the memory of a man; they’ve
forgotten to bury him! Why, his eye is made of glass, and his leg of cork,
and he goes on wires; he even talks on wires!”

Maria Alexandrovna’s face took a serious expression. “What nonsense you
talk,” she said; “and aren’t you ashamed of yourself, you, a young man and
a relation too—to talk like that of a most honourable old nobleman! not to
mention his incomparable personal goodness and kindness” (her voice here
trembled with emotion). “He is a relic, a chip, so to speak, of our old
aristocracy. I know, my dear young friend, that all this flightiness on
your part, proceeds from those ’new ideas’ of which you are so fond of
talking; but, goodness me, I’ve seen a good deal more of life than you
have: I’m a mother; and though I see the greatness and nobleness, if you
like, of these ‘new ideas,’ yet I can understand the practical side of
things too! Now, this gentleman is an old man, and that is quite enough to
render him ridiculous in your eyes. You, who talk of emancipating your
serfs, and ‘doing something for posterity,’ indeed! I tell you what it is,
it’s your Shakespeare! You stuff yourself full of Shakespeare, who has
long ago outlived his time, my dear Paul; and who, if he lived now, with
all his wisdom, would never make head or tail of our way of life!”

“If there be any chivalry left in our modern society, it is only in the
highest circles of the aristocracy. A prince is a prince either in a hovel
or in a palace! _You_ are more or less a representative of the highest
circles; your extraction is aristocratic. I, too, am not altogether a
stranger to the upper ten, and it’s a bad fledgling that fouls its own
nest! However, my dear Paul, you’ll forget your Shakespeare yet, and
you’ll understand all this much better than I can explain it. I foresee
it! Besides, I’m sure you are only joking; you did not mean what you said.
Stay here, dear Paul, will you? I’m just going upstairs to make inquiries
after the prince, he may want something.” And Maria Alexandrovna left the
room hurriedly.

“Maria Alexandrovna seems highly delighted that Mrs. Antipova, who thinks
so much of herself, did not get hold of the prince!” remarked the widow;
“Mrs. Antipova must be gnashing her teeth with annoyance just now! She’s a
relation, too, as I’ve been pointing out to Maria Alexandrovna.”

Observing that no one answered her, and casting her eyes on Zina and
Mosgliakoff, the widow suddenly recollected herself, and discreetly left
the room, as though to fetch something. However, she rewarded herself for
her discretion, by putting her ear to the keyhole, as soon as she had
closed the door after her.

Pavel Alexandrovitch immediately turned to Zina. He was in a state of
great agitation; his voice shook.

“Zenaida Afanassievna, are you angry with me?” he began, in a timid,
beseechful tone.

“With you? Why?” asked Zina, blushing a little, and raising her
magnificent eyes to his face.

“For coming earlier. I couldn’t help it; I couldn’t wait another
fortnight; I dreamed of you every night; so I flew off to learn my fate.
But you are frowning, you are angry;—oh; am I really not to hear anything
definite, even now?”

Zina distinctly and decidedly frowned.

“I supposed you would speak of this,” she said, with her eyes drooped
again, but with a firm and severe voice, in which some annoyance was
perceptible; “and as the expectation of it was very tedious, the sooner
you had your say, the better! You insist upon an answer again, do you?
Very well, I say _wait_, just as I said it before. I now repeat, as I did
then, that I have not as yet decided, and cannot therefore promise to be
your wife. You cannot force a girl to such a decision, Pavel
Alexandrovitch! However, to relieve your mind, I will add, that I do not
as yet refuse you absolutely; and pray observe that I give you thus much
hope of a favourable reply, merely out of forced deference to your
impatience and agitation; and that if I think fit afterwards to reject you
altogether, you are not to blame me for having given you false hopes. So
now you know.”

“Oh, but—but—what’s the use of that? What hope am I to get out of that,
Zina?” cried Mosgliakoff in piteous tones.

“Recollect what I have said, and draw whatever you please from the words;
that’s your business. I shall add nothing. I do not refuse you; I merely
say—wait! And I repeat, I reserve the free right of rejecting you
afterwards if I choose so to do. Just one more word: if you come here
before the fixed time relying on outside protection, or even on my
mother’s influence to help you gain your end, let me tell you, you make a
great mistake; if you worry me now, I shall refuse you outright. I hope we
understand each other now, and that I shall hear no more of this, until
the period I named to you for my decision.” All this was said quietly and
drily, and without a pause, as if learnt by rote. Paul felt foolish; but
just at this moment Maria Alexandrovna entered the room, and the widow
after her.

“I think he’s just coming, Zina! Nastasia Petrovna, make some new tea
quick, please!” The good lady was considerably agitated.

“Mrs. Antipova has sent her maid over to inquire about the prince already.
How angry she must be feeling just now,” remarked the widow, as she
commenced to pass over the tea-urn.

“And what’s that to me!” replied Maria Alexandrovna, over her shoulder.
“Just as though _I_ care what she thinks! _I_ shall not send a maid to her
kitchen to inquire, I assure you! And I am surprised, downright
_surprised_, that, not only you, but all the town, too, should suppose
that that wretched woman is my enemy! I appeal to you, Paul—you know us
both. Why should I be her enemy, now? Is it a question of precedence?
Pooh! I don’t care about precedence! She may be first, if she likes, and I
shall be readiest of all to go and congratulate her on the fact. Besides,
it’s all nonsense! Why, I take her part; I _must_ take her part. People
malign her; _why_ do you all fall upon her so? Because she’s young, and
likes to be smart; is that it? Dear me, I think finery is a good bit
better than some other failings—like Natalia Dimitrievna’s, for instance,
who has a taste for things that cannot be mentioned in polite society. Or
is it that Mrs. Antipova goes out too much, and never stays at home? My
goodness! why, the woman has never had any education; naturally she
doesn’t care to sit down to read, or anything of that sort. True, she
coquets and makes eyes at everybody who looks at her. But why do people
tell her that she’s pretty? especially as she only has a pale face, and
nothing else to boast of.

“She is amusing at a dance, I admit; but why do people tell her that she
dances the polka so well? She wears hideous hats and things; but it’s not
her fault that nature gave her no gift of good taste. She talks scandal;
but that’s the custom of the place—who doesn’t here? That fellow,
Sushikoff, with his whiskers, goes to see her pretty often while her
husband plays cards, but that _may_ be merely a trumped-up tale; at all
events I always say so, and take her part in every way! But, good heavens!
here’s the prince at last! ’Tis he, ’tis he! I recognise him! I should
know him out of a thousand! At last I see you! At last, my Prince!” cried
Maria Alexandrovna,—and she rushed to greet the prince as he entered the
room.





CHAPTER IV.


At first sight you would not take this prince for an old man at all, and
it is only when you come near and take a good look at him, that you see he
is merely a dead man working on wires. All the resources of science are
brought to bear upon this mummy, in order to give it the appearance of
life and youth. A marvellous wig, glorious whiskers, moustache and
napoleon—all of the most raven black—cover half his face. He is painted
and powdered with very great skill, so much so that one can hardly detect
any wrinkles. What has become of them, goodness only knows.

He is dressed in the pink of fashion, just as though he had walked
straight out of a tailor’s fashion-page. His coat, his gloves, tie, his
waistcoat, his linen, are all in perfect taste, and in the very last mode.
The prince limps slightly, but so slightly that one would suppose he did
it on purpose because _that_ was in fashion too. In his eye he wears a
glass—in the eye which is itself glass already.

He was soaked with scent. His speech and manner of pronouncing certain
syllables was full of affectation; and this was, perhaps, all that he
retained of the mannerisms and tricks of his younger days. For if the
prince had not quite lost his wits as yet, he had certainly parted with
nearly every vestige of his memory, which—alas!—is a thing which no amount
of perfumeries and wigs and rouge and tight-lacing will renovate. He
continually forgets words in the midst of conversation, and loses his way,
which makes it a matter of some difficulty to carry on a conversation with
him. However, Maria Alexandrovna has confidence in her inborn dexterity,
and at sight of the prince she flies into a condition of unspeakable
rapture.

“Oh! but you’ve not changed, you’ve not changed a _bit_!” she cries,
seizing her guest by both hands, and popping him into a comfortable
arm-chair. “Sit down, dear Prince, do sit down! Six years, prince, six
whole long years since we saw each other, and not a letter, not a little
tiny scrap of a note all the while. _Oh_, how naughty you have been,
prince! And _how_ angry I have been with you, my dear friend! But, tea!
tea! Good Heavens, Nastasia Petrovna, tea for the prince, quick!”

“Th—thanks, thanks; I’m very s—orry!” stammered the old man (I forgot to
mention that he stammered a little, but he did even this as though it were
the fashion to do it). “Very s—sorry; fancy, I—I wanted to co—come last
year, but they t—told me there was cho—cho—cholera here.”

“There was foot and mouth disease here, uncle,” put in Mosgliakoff, by way
of distinguishing himself. Maria Alexandrovna gave him a severe look.

“Ye—yes, foot and mouth disease, or something of that s—sort,” said the
prince; “so I st—stayed at home. Well, and how’s your h—husband, my dear
Anna Nic—Nicolaevna? Still at his proc—procuror’s work?”

“No, prince!” said Maria Alexandrovna, a little disconcerted. “My husband
is not a procurer.”

“I’ll bet anything that uncle has mixed you up with Anna Nicolaevna
Antipova,” said Mosgliakoff, but stopped suddenly on observing the look on
Maria Alexandrovna’s face.

“Ye—yes, of course, Anna Nicolaevna. A—An. What the deuce! I’m always
f—forgetting; Antipova, Antipova, of course,” continued the prince.

“No, prince, you have made a great mistake,” remarked Maria Alexandrovna,
with a bitter smile. “I am not Anna Nicolaevna at all, and I confess I
should never have believed that you would not recognise me. You have
astonished me, prince. I am your old friend, Maria Alexandrovna Moskaloff.
Don’t you remember Maria Alexandrovna?”

“M—Maria Alexandrovna! think of that; and I thought she was w—what’s her
name. Y—yes, Anna Vasilievna! _C’est délicieux._ W—why I thought you were
going to take me to this A—Anna Matveyevna. Dear me! _C’est ch—charmant!_
It often happens so w—with me. I get taken to the wrong house; but I’m
v—very pleased, v—very pleased! So you’re not Nastasia Va—silievna? How
interesting.”

“I’m Maria Alexandrovna, prince; _Maria Alexandrovna_! Oh! how naughty you
are, Prince, to forget your best, best friend!”

“Ye—es! ye—yes! best friend; best friend, for—forgive me!” stammered the
old man, staring at Zina.

“That’s my daughter Zina. You are not acquainted yet, prince. She wasn’t
here when you were last in the town, in the year —— you know.”

“Oh, th—this is your d—daughter!” muttered the old man, staring hungrily
at Zina through his glasses. “Dear me, dear me. _Ch—charmante,
ch—armante!_ But what a lo—ovely girl,” he added, evidently impressed.

“Tea! prince,” remarked Maria Alexandrovna, directing his attention to the
page standing before him with the tray. The prince took a cup, and
examined the boy, who had a nice fresh face of his own.

“Ah! this is your l—little boy? Wh—what a charming little b—boy! and does
he be—behave nicely?”

“But, prince,” interrupted Maria Alexandrovna, impatiently, “what is this
dreadful occurrence I hear of? I confess I was nearly beside myself with
terror when I heard of it. Were you not hurt at all? _Do_ take care. One
cannot make light of this sort of thing.”

“Upset, upset; the c—coachman upset me!” cried the prince, with unwonted
vivacity. “I thought it was the end of the world, and I was fri—frightened
out of my wits. I didn’t expect it; I didn’t, indeed! and my co—oachman is
to blame for it all. I trust you, my friend, to lo—ok into the matter
well. I feel sure he was making an attempt on my life!”

“All right, all right, uncle,” said Paul; “I’ll see about it. But look
here—forgive him, just this once, uncle; just this once, won’t you?”

“N—not I! Not for anything! I’m sure he wants my life, he and Lavrenty
too. It’s—it’s the ’new ideas;’ it’s Com—Communism, in the fullest sense
of the word. I daren’t meet them anywhere.”

“You are right, you are quite right, prince,” cried Maria Alexandrovna.
“You don’t know how I suffer myself from these wretched people. I’ve just
been obliged to change two of my servants; and you’ve no idea how _stupid_
they are, prince.”

“Ye—yes! quite so!” said the prince, delighted—as all old men are whose
senile chatter is listened to with servility. “But I like a fl—flunky to
look stupid; it gives them presence. There’s my Terenty, now. You remember
Terenty, my friend? Well, the f—first time I ever looked at him I said,
‘You shall be my ha—hall porter.’ He’s stupid, phen—phen—omenally stupid,
he looks like a she—sheep; but his dig—dignity and majesty are wonderful.
When I look at him he seems to be composing some l—learned dis—sertation.
He’s just like the German philosopher, Kant, or like some fa—fat old
turkey, and that’s just what one wants in a serving-man.”

Maria Alexandrovna laughed, and clapped her hands in the highest state of
ecstasy; Paul supported her with all his might; Nastasia Petrovna laughed
too; and even Zina smiled.

“But, prince, how clever, how witty, how _humorous_ you are!” cried Maria
Alexandrovna. “What a wonderful gilt of remarking the smallest refinements
of character. And for a man like you to eschew all society, and shut
yourself up for five years! With such talents! Why, prince, you could
_write_, you could be an author. You could emulate Von Vezin, Gribojedoff,
Gogol!”

“Ye—yes! ye—yes!” said the delighted prince. “I can reproduce things I
see, very well. And, do you know, I used to be a very wi—witty fellow
indeed, some time ago. I even wrote a play once. There were some very
smart couplets, I remember; but it was never acted.”

“Oh! how nice it would be to read it over, especially just _now_, eh,
Zina? for we are thinking of getting up a play, you must know, prince, for
the benefit of the ‘martyrs of the Fatherland,’ the wounded soldiers.
There, now, how handy your play would come in!”

“Certainly, certainly. I—I would even write you another. I think I’ve
quite forgotten the old one. I remember there were two or three such
epigrams that (here the prince kissed his own hand to convey an idea of
the exquisite wit of his lines) I recollect when I was abroad I made a
real furore. I remember Lord Byron well; we were great friends; you should
have seen him dance the mazurka one day during the Vienna Congress.”

“Lord Byron, uncle?—Surely not!”

“Ye—yes, Lord Byron. Perhaps it was not Lord Byron, though, perhaps it was
someone else; no, it wasn’t Lord Byron, it was some Pole; I remember now.
A won—der-ful fellow that Pole was! He said he was a C—Count, and he
turned out to be a c—cook—shop man! But he danced the mazurka
won—der—fully, and broke his leg at last. I recollect I wrote some lines
at the time:—

“Our little Pole
Danced like blazes.”

—How did it go on, now? Wait a minute! No, I can’t remember.”

“I’ll tell you, uncle. It must have been like this,” said Paul, becoming
more and more inspired:—

“But he tripped in a hole,
Which stopped his crazes.”

“Ye—yes, that was it, I think, or something very like it. I don’t know,
though—perhaps it wasn’t. Anyhow, the lines were very sm—art. I forget a
good deal of what I have seen and done. I’m so b—busy now!”

“But do let me hear how you have employed your time in your solitude, dear
prince,” said Maria Alexandrovna. “I must confess that I have thought of
you so often, and often, that I am burning with impatience to hear more
about you and your doings.”

“Employed my time? Oh, very busy; very busy, ge—generally. One rests, you
see, part of the day; and then I imagine a good many things.”

“I should think you have a very strong imagination, haven’t you, uncle?”
remarked Paul.

“Exceptionally so, my dear fellow. I sometimes imagine things which amaze
even myself! When I was at Kadueff,—by-the-by, you were vice-governor of
Kadueff, weren’t you?”

“I, uncle! Why, what are you thinking of?”

“No? Just fancy, my dear fellow! and I’ve been thinking all this time how
f—funny that the vice-governor of Kadueff should be here with quite a
different face: he had a fine intelligent, dig—dignified face, you know. A
wo—wonderful fellow! Always writing verses, too; he was rather like the
Ki—King of Diamonds from the side view, but—”

“No, prince,” interrupted Maria Alexandrovna. “I assure you, you’ll ruin
yourself with the life you are leading! To make a hermit of oneself for
five years, and see no one, and hear no one: you’re a lost man, dear
prince! Ask any one of those who love you, they’ll all tell you the same;
you’re a lost man!”

“No,” cried the prince, “really?”

“Yes, I assure you of it! I am speaking to you as a sister—as a friend! I
am telling you this because you are very dear to me, and because the
memory of the past is sacred to me. No, no! You must change your way of
living; otherwise you will fall ill, and break up, and die!”

“Gracious heavens! Surely I shan’t d—die so soon?” cried the old man.
“You—you are right about being ill; I am ill now and then. I’ll tell you
all the sy—symptoms! I’ll de—detail them to you. Firstly I—”

“Uncle, don’t you think you had better tell us all about it another day?”
Paul interrupted hurriedly. “I think we had better be starting just now,
don’t you?”

“Yes—yes, perhaps, perhaps. But remind me to tell you another time; it’s a
most interesting case, I assure you!”

“But listen, my dear prince!” Maria Alexandrovna resumed, “why don’t you
try being doctored abroad?”

“Ab—road? Yes, yes—I shall certainly go abroad. I remember when I was
abroad, about ’20; it was delightfully g—gay and jolly. I very nearly
married a vi—viscountess, a French woman. I was fearfully in love, but
som—somebody else married her, not I. It was a very s—strange thing. I had
only gone away for a coup—couple of hours, and this Ger—German baron
fellow came and carried her off! He went into a ma—madhouse afterwards!”

“Yes, dear prince, you must look after your health. There are such good
doctors abroad; and—besides, the mere change of life, what will not that
alone do for you! You _must_ desert your dear Donchanovo, if only for a
time!”

“C—certainly, certainly! I’ve long meant to do it. I’m going to try
hy—hydropathy!”

“Hydropathy?”

“Yes. I’ve tried it once before: I was abroad, you know, and they
persuaded me to try drinking the wa—waters. There wasn’t anything the
matter with me, but I agreed, just out of deli—delicacy for their
feelings; and I did seem to feel easier, somehow. So I drank, and drank,
and dra—ank up a whole waterfall; and I assure you if I hadn’t fallen ill
just then I should have been quite well, th—thanks to the water! But, I
confess, you’ve frightened me so about these ma—maladies and things, I
feel quite put out. I’ll come back d—directly!”

“Why, prince, where are you off to?” asked Maria Alexandrovna in surprise.

“Directly, directly. I’m just going to note down an i—idea!”

“What sort of idea?” cried Paul, bursting with laughter.

Maria Alexandrovna lost all patience.

“I cannot understand what you find to laugh at!” she cried, as the old man
disappeared; “to laugh at an honourable old man, and turn every word of
his into ridicule—presuming on his angelic good nature. I assure you I
_blushed_ for you, Paul Alexandrovitch! Why, what do you see in him to
laugh at? I never saw anything funny about him!”

“Well, I laugh because he does not recognise people, and talks such
nonsense!”

“That’s simply the result of his sad life, of his dreadful five years’
captivity, under the guardianship of that she-devil! You should _pity_,
not laugh at him! He did not even know _me_; you saw it yourself. I tell
you it’s a crying shame; he must be saved, at all costs! I recommend him
to go abroad so that he may get out of the clutches of that—beast of a
woman!”

“Do you know what—we must find him a wife!” cried Paul.

“Oh, Mr. Mosgliakoff, you are too bad; you really are too bad!”

“No, no, Maria Alexandrovna; I assure you, this time I’m speaking in all
seriousness. Why _not_ marry him off? Isn’t it rather a brilliant idea?
What harm can marriage do him? On the contrary, he is in that position
that such a step alone can save him! In the first place, he will get rid
of that fox of a woman; and, secondly, he may find some girl, or better
still some widow—kind, good, wise and gentle, and poor, who will look
after him as his own daughter would, and who will be sensible of the
honour he does her in making her his wife! And what could be better for
the old fellow than to have such a person about him, rather than the—woman
he has now? Of course she must be nice-looking, for uncle appreciates good
looks; didn’t you observe how he stared at Miss Zina?”

“But how will you find him such a bride?” asked Nastasia Petrovna, who had
listened intently to Paul’s suggestion.

“What a question! Why, you yourself, if you pleased! and why not, pray? In
the first place, you are good-looking, you are a widow, you are generous,
you are poor (at least I don’t think you are very rich). Then you are a
very reasonable woman: you’ll learn to love him, and take good care of
him; you’ll send that other woman to the deuce, and take your husband
abroad, where you will feed him on pudding and lollipops till the moment
of his quitting this wicked world, which will be in about a year, or in a
couple of months perhaps. After that, you emerge a princess, a rich widow,
and, as a prize for your goodness to the old gentleman, you’ll marry a
fine young marquis, or a governor-general, or somebody of the sort!
There—that’s a pretty enough prospect, isn’t it?”

“Tfu! Goodness me! I should fall in love with him at once, out of pure
gratitude, if he only proposed to me!” said the widow, with her black eyes
all ablaze; “but, of course, it’s all nonsense!”

“Nonsense, is it? Shall I make it sound sense, then, for you? Ask me
prettily, and if I don’t make you his betrothed by this evening, you may
cut my little finger off! Why, there’s nothing in the world easier than to
talk uncle into anything you please! He’ll only say, ‘Ye—yes, ye—yes,’
just as you heard him now! We’ll marry him so that he doesn’t know
anything about it, if you like? We’ll deceive him and marry him, if you
please! Any way you like, it can be done! Why, it’s for his own good; it’s
out of pity for himself! Don’t you think, seriously, Nastasia Petrovna,
that you had better put on some smart clothes in any case?”

Paul’s enthusiasm amounted by now to something like madness, while the
widow’s mouth watered at his idea, in spite of her better judgment.

“I know, I know I look horridly untidy!” she said. “I go about anyhow,
nowadays! There’s nothing to dress for. Do I really look like a regular
cook?”

All this time Maria Alexandrovna sat still, with a strange expression on
her face. I shall not be far wrong if I say that she listened to Paul’s
wild suggestion with a look of terror, almost: she was confused and
startled; at last she recollected herself, and spoke.

“All this is very nice, of course; but at the same time it is utter
nonsense, and perfectly out of the question!” she observed cuttingly.

“Why, why, my good Maria Alexandrovna? Why is it such nonsense, or why out
of the question?”

“For many reasons; and, principally because you are, as the prince is
also, a guest in my house; and I cannot permit anyone to forget their
respect towards my establishment! I shall consider your words as a joke,
Paul Alexandrovitch, and nothing more! Here comes the prince—thank
goodness!”

“Here I am!” cried the old man as he entered. “It’s a wo—wonderful thing
how many good ideas of all s—sorts I’m having to-day! and another day I
may spend the whole of it without a single one! As—tonishing? not one all
day!”

“Probably the result of your accident, to-day, uncle! Your nerves got
shaken up, you see, and ——”

“Ye—yes, I think so, I think so too; and I look on the accident as
pro—fitable, on the whole; and therefore I’m going to excuse the coachman.
I don’t think it was an at—tempt on my life, after all, do you? Besides,
he was punished a little while a—go, when his beard was sh—shaved off!”

“Beard shaved off? Why, uncle, his beard is as big as a German state!”

“Ye—yes, a German state, you are very happy in your ex—pressions, my boy!
but it’s a fa—false one. Fancy what happened: I sent for a price-current
for false hair and beards, and found advertisements for splendid
ser—vants’ and coachmen’s beards, very cheap—extraordinarily so! I sent
for one, and it certainly was a be—auty. But when we wanted to clap it on
the coachman, we found he had one of his own t—twice as big; so I thought,
shall I cut off his, or let him wear it, and send this one b—back? and I
decided to shave his off, and let him wear the f—false one!”

“On the theory that art is higher than nature, I suppose uncle?”

“Yes, yes! Just so—and I assure you, when we cut off his beard he suffered
as much as though we were depriving him of all he held most dear! But we
must be go—going, my boy!”

“But I hope, dear prince, that you will only call upon the governor!”
cried Maria Alexandrovna, in great agitation. “You are _mine_ now, Prince;
you belong to _my_ family for the whole of this day! Of course I will say
nothing about the society of this place. Perhaps you are thinking of
paying Anna Nicolaevna a visit? I will not say a word to dissuade you; but
at the same time I am quite convinced that—time will show! Remember one
thing, dear Prince, that I am your sister, your nurse, your guardian for
to-day at least, and oh!—I tremble for you. You don’t know these people,
Prince, as I do! You don’t know them fully: but time will teach you all
you do not know.”

“Trust me, Maria Alexandrovna!” said Paul, “it shall all be exactly as I
have promised you!”

“Oh—but you’re such a weathercock! I can never trust _you_! I shall wait
for you at dinner time, Prince; we dine early. How sorry I am that my
husband happens to be in the country on such an occasion! How happy he
would have been to see you! He esteems you so highly, Prince; he is so
sincerely attached to you!”

“Your husband? dear me! So you have a h—husband, too!” observed the old
man.

“Oh, prince, prince! how forgetful you are! Why, you have _quite_, quite
forgotten the past! My husband, Afanassy Matveyevitch, surely you must
remember him? He is in the country: but you have seen him thousands of
times before! Don’t you remember—Afanassy Matveyevitch!”

“Afanassy Matveyevitch. Dear me!—and in the co—country! how very charming!
So you have a husband! dear me, I remember a vaudeville very like that,
something about—

                           “The husband’s here,
                         And his wife at Tvere.”

Charming, charming—such a good rhyme too; and it’s a most ri—diculous
story! Charming, charming; the wife’s away, you know, at Jaroslaf or Tv——
or somewhere, and the husband is——is——Dear me! I’m afraid I’ve forgotten
what we were talking about! Yes, yes—we must be going, my boy! _Au revoir,
madame; adieu, ma charmante demoiselle_” he added, turning to Zina, and
putting the ends of her fingers to his lips.

“Come back to dinner,—to dinner, prince! don’t forget to come back here
quick!” cried Maria Alexandrovna after them as they went out; “be back to
dinner!”





CHAPTER V.


“Nastasia Petrovna, I think you had better go and see what is doing in the
kitchen!” observed Maria Alexandrovna, as she returned from seeing the
prince off. “I’m sure that rascal Nikitka will spoil the dinner! Probably
he’s drunk already!” The widow obeyed.

As the latter left the room, she glanced suspiciously at Maria
Alexandrovna, and observed that the latter was in a high state of
agitation. Therefore, instead of going to look after Nikitka, she went
through the “Salon,” along the passage to her own room, and through that
to a dark box-room, where the old clothes of the establishment and such
things were stored. There she approached the locked door on tiptoe; and
stifling her breath, she bent to the keyhole, through which she peeped,
and settled herself to listen intently. This door, which was always kept
shut, was one of the three doors communicating with the room where Maria
Alexandrovna and Zina were now left alone. Maria Alexandrovna always
considered Nastasia an untrustworthy sort of woman, although extremely
silly into the bargain. Of course she had suspected the widow—more than
once—of eavesdropping; but it so happened that at the moment Madame
Moskaleva was too agitated and excited to think of the usual precautions.

She was sitting in her arm-chair and gazing at Zina. Zina felt that her
mother was looking at her, and was conscious of an unpleasant sensation at
her heart.

“Zina!”

Zina slowly turned her head towards the speaker, and lifted her splendid
dark eyes to hers.

“Zina, I wish to speak to you on a most important matter!”

Zina adopted an attentive air, and sat still with folded hands, waiting
for light. In her face there was an expression of annoyance as well as
irony, which she did her best to hide.

“I wish to ask you first, Zina, what you thought of _that_ Mosgliakoff,
to-day?”

“You have known my opinion of him for a long time!” replied Zina, surlily.

“Yes, yes, of course! but I think he is getting just a little _too_
troublesome, with his continual bothering you—”

“Oh, but he says he is in love with me, in which case his importunity is
pardonable!”

“Strange! You used not to be so ready to find his offences pardonable; you
used to fly out at him if ever I mentioned his name!”

“Strange, too, that you always defended him, and were so very anxious that
I should marry him!—and now you are the first to attack him!”

“Yes; I don’t deny, Zina, that I did wish, then, to see you married to
Mosgliakoff! It was painful to me to witness your continual grief, your
sufferings, which I can well realize—whatever you may think to the
contrary!—and which deprived me of my rest at night! I determined at last
that there was but one great change of life that would ever save you from
the sorrows of the past, and that change was matrimony! We are not rich;
we cannot afford to go abroad. All the asses in the place prick their long
ears, and wonder that you should be unmarried at twenty-three years old;
and they must needs invent all sorts of stories to account for the fact!
As if I would marry you to one of our wretched little town councillors, or
to Ivan Ivanovitch, the family lawyer! There are no husbands for _you_ in
this place, Zina! Of course Paul Mosgliakoff is a silly sort of a fellow,
but he is better than these people here: he is fairly born, at least, and
he has 150 serfs and landed property, all of which is better than living
by bribes and corruption, and goodness knows what jobbery besides, as
these do! and that is why I allowed my eyes to rest on him. But I give you
my solemn word, I never had any real sympathy for him! and if Providence
has sent you someone better now, oh, my dear girl, how fortunate that you
have not given your word to Mosgliakoff! You didn’t tell him anything for
certain to-day, did you, Zina?”

“What is the use of beating about the bush, when the whole thing lies in a
couple of words?” said Zina, with some show of annoyance.

“Beating about the bush, Zina? Is that the way to speak to your mother?
But what am I? You have long ceased to trust to your poor mother! You have
long looked upon me as your enemy, and not as your mother at all!”

“Oh, come mother! you and I are beyond quarrelling about an expression!
Surely we understand one another by now? It is about time we did, anyhow!”

“But you offend me, my child! you will not believe that I am ready to
devote _all, all_ I can give, in order to establish your destiny on a safe
and happy footing!”

Zina looked angrily and sarcastically at her mother.

“Would not you like to marry me to this old prince, now, in order to
establish my destiny on a safe and happy footing?”

“I have not said a word about it; but, as you mention the fact, I will say
that if you _were_ to marry the prince it would be a very happy thing for
you, and—”

“Oh! Well, I consider the idea utter nonsense!” cried the girl
passionately. “Nonsense, humbug! and what’s more, I think you have a good
deal too much poetical inspiration, mamma; you are a woman poet in the
fullest sense of the term, and they call you by that name here! You are
always full of projects; and the impracticability and absurdity of your
ideas does not in the least discourage you. I felt, when the prince was
sitting here, that you had that notion in your head. When Mosgliakoff was
talking nonsense there about marrying the old man to somebody I read all
your thoughts in your face. I am ready to bet any money that you are
thinking of it now, and that you have come to me now about this very
question! However, as your perpetual projects on my behalf are beginning
to weary me to death, I must beg you not to say one word about it, not
_one word_, mamma; do you hear me? _not one word_; and I beg you will
remember what I say!” She was panting with rage.

“You are a child, Zina; a poor sorrow-worn, sick child!” said Maria
Alexandrovna in tearful accents. “You speak to your poor mother
disrespectfully; you wound me deeply, my dear; there is not another mother
in the world who would have borne what I have to bear from you every day!
But you are suffering, you are sick, you are sorrowful, and I am your
mother, and, first of all, I am a Christian woman! I must bear it all, and
forgive it. But one word, Zina: if I had really thought of the union you
suggest, why would you consider it so impracticable and absurd? In my
opinion, Mosgliakoff has never said a wiser thing than he did to-day, when
he declared that marriage was what alone could save the prince,—not, of
course, marriage with that slovenly slut, Nastasia; there he certainly
_did_ make a fool of himself!”

“Now look here, mamma; do you ask me this out of pure curiosity, or with
design? Tell me the truth.”

“All I ask is, why does it appear to you to be so absurd?”

“Good heavens, mother, you’ll drive me wild! What a fate!” cried Zina,
stamping her foot with impatience. “I’ll tell you why, if you can’t see
for yourself. Not to mention all the other evident absurdities of the
plan, to take advantage of the weakened wits of a poor old man, and
deceive him and marry him—an old cripple, in order to get hold of his
money,—and then every day and every hour to wish for his death, is, in my
opinion, not only nonsense, but so mean, _so_ mean, mamma, that I—I can’t
congratulate you on your brilliant idea; that’s all I can say!”

There was silence for one minute.

“Zina, do you remember all that happened two years ago?” asked Maria
Alexandrovna of a sudden.

Zina trembled.

“Mamma!” she said, severely, “you promised me solemnly never to mention
that again.”

“And I ask you now, as solemnly, my dear child, to allow me to break that
promise, just once! I have never broken it before. Zina! the time has come
for a full and clear understanding between us! These two years of silence
have been terrible. We cannot go on like this. I am ready to pray you, on
my knees, to let me speak. Listen, Zina, your own mother who bore you
beseeches you, on her knees! And I promise you faithfully, Zina, and
solemnly, on the word of an unhappy but adoring mother, that never, under
any circumstances, not even to save my life, will I ever mention the
subject again. This shall be the last time, but it is absolutely
necessary!”

Maria Alexandrovna counted upon the effect of her words, and with reason:

“Speak, then!” said Zina, growing whiter every moment.

“Thank you, Zina!——Two years ago there came to the house, to teach your
little brother Mitya, since dead, a tutor——”

“Why do you begin so solemnly, mamma? Why all this eloquence, all these
quite unnecessary details, which are painful to me, and only too well
known to both of us?” cried Zina with a sort of irritated disgust.

“Because, my dear child, I, your mother, felt in some degree bound to
justify myself before you; and also because I wish to present this whole
question to you from an entirely new point of view, and not from that
mistaken position which you are accustomed to take up with regard to it;
and because, lastly, I think you will thus better understand the
conclusion at which I shall arrive upon the whole question. Do not think,
dear child, that I wish to trifle with your heart! No, Zina, you will find
in me a real mother; and perhaps, with tears streaming from your eyes, you
will ask and beseech at my feet—at the feet of the ’_mean woman_,’ as you
have just called me,—yes, and pray for that reconciliation which you have
rejected so long! That’s why I wish to recall all, Zina, _all_ that has
happened, from the very beginning; and without this I shall not speak at
all!”

“Speak, then!” repeated Zina, cursing the necessity for her mother’s
eloquence from the very bottom of her heart.

“I continue then, Zina!——This tutor, a master of the parish school, almost
a boy, makes upon you what is, to me, a totally inexplicable impression. I
built too much upon my confidence in your good sense, or your noble pride,
and principally upon the fact of his insignificance—(I must speak out!)—to
allow myself to harbour the slightest suspicion of you! And then you
suddenly come to me, one fine day, and state that you intend to marry the
man! Zina, it was putting a knife to my heart! I gave a shriek and lost
consciousness.

“But of course you remember all this. Of course I thought it my duty to
use all my power over you, which power you called tyranny. Think for
yourself—a boy, the son of a deacon, receiving a salary of twelve roubles
a month—a writer of weak verses which are printed, out of pity, in the
’library of short readings.’ A man, a boy, who could talk of nothing but
that accursed Shakespeare,—this boy to be the husband of Zenaida
Moskaloff! Forgive me, Zina, but the very thought of it all makes me
_wild_!

“I rejected him, of course. But no power would stop _you_; your father
only blinked his eyes, as usual, and could not even understand what I was
telling him about. You continue your relations with this boy, even giving
him rendezvous, and, worst of all, you allow yourself to correspond with
him!

“Rumours now begin to flit about town: I am assailed with hints; they blow
their trumpets of joy and triumph; and suddenly all my fears and
anticipations are verified! You and he quarrel over something or other; he
shows himself to be a boy (I can’t call him a man!), who is utterly
unworthy of you, and threatens to show your letters all over the town! On
hearing this threat, you, beside yourself with irritation, boxed his ears.
Yes, Zina, I am aware of even that fact! I know all, all! But to
continue—the wretched boy shows one of your letters the very same day to
that ne’er-do-well Zanshin, and within an hour Natalie Dimitrievna holds
it in her hands—my deadly enemy! The same evening the miserable fellow
attempts to put an end to himself, in remorse. In a word, there is a
fearful scandal stirred up. That slut, Nastasia, comes panting to me with
the dreadful news; she tells me that Natalie Dimitrievna has had your
letter for a whole hour. In a couple of hours the whole town will learn of
your foolishness! I bore it all. I did not fall down in a swoon; but oh,
the blows, the blows you dealt to my heart, Zina! That shameless scum of
the earth, Nastasia, says she will get the letter back for two hundred
roubles! I myself run over, in thin shoes, too, through the snow to the
Jew Baumstein, and pledge my diamond clasps—a keepsake of my dear
mother’s! In a couple of hours the letter is in my hands! Nastasia had
stolen it; she had broken open a desk, and your honour was safe!

“But what a dreadful day you had sentenced me to live! I noticed some grey
hairs among my raven locks for the first time, next morning! Zina, you
have judged this boy’s action yourself now! You can admit now, and perhaps
smile a bitter smile over the admission, that it was beyond the limits of
good sense to wish to entrust your fate to this youth.

“But since that fatal time you are wretched, my child, you are miserable!
You cannot forget him, or rather not him—for he was never worthy of
you,—but you cannot forget the phantom of your past joy! This wretched
young fellow is now on the point of death—consumption, they say; and you,
angel of goodness that you are! you do not wish to marry while he is
alive, because you fear to harass him in his last days; because to this
day he is miserable with jealousy, though I am convinced that he never
loved you in the best and highest sense of the word! I know well that,
hearing of Mosgliakoff’s proposal to you, he has been in a flutter of
jealousy, and has spied upon you and your actions ever since; and you—you
have been merciful to him, my child. And oh! God knows how I have watered
my pillow with tears for you!”

“Oh, mother, do drop all this sort of thing!” cried Zina, with
inexpressible agony in her tone. “Surely we needn’t hear all about your
pillow!” she added, sharply. “Can’t we get on without all this declamation
and pirouetting?”

“You do not believe me, Zina! Oh! do not look so unfriendly at me, my
child! My eyes have not been dry these two years. I have hidden my tears
from you; but I am changed, Zina mine, much changed and in many ways! I
have long known of your feelings, Zina, but I admit I have only lately
realized the depth of your mental anguish. Can you blame me, my child, if
I looked upon this attachment of yours as romanticism—called into being by
that accursed Shakespeare, who shoves his nose in everywhere where he
isn’t wanted?

“What mother would blame me for my fears of that kind, for my measures,
for the severity of my judgment? But now, understanding as I do, and
realizing your two years’ sufferings, I can estimate the depth of your
real feelings. Believe me, I understand you far better than you understand
yourself! I am convinced that you love not him—not this unnatural boy,—but
your lost happiness, your broken hopes, your cracked idol!

“I have loved too—perhaps more deeply than yourself; I, too, have
suffered, I, too, have lost my exalted ideals and seen them levelled with
the earth; and therefore who can blame me now—and, above all, can _you_
blame me now,—if I consider a marriage with the prince to be the one
saving, the one _essential_ move left to you in your present position”?

Zina listened to this long declamation with surprise. She knew well that
her mother never adopted this tone without good reason. However this last
and unexpected conclusion fairly amazed her.

“You don’t mean to say you seriously entertain the idea of marrying me to
this prince?” she cried bewildered, and gazing at her mother almost with
alarm; “that this is no mere idea, no project, no flighty inspiration, but
your deliberate intention? I _have_ guessed right, then? And pray, _how_
is this marriage going to save me? and _why_ is it essential to me in my
present position? And—and what has all this to do with what you have been
talking about?——I cannot understand you, mother,—not a bit!”

“And _I_ can’t understand, angel mine, how you _cannot_ see the connection
of it all!” cried Maria Alexandrovna, in her turn. “In the first place,
you would pass into new society, into a new world. You would leave for
ever this loathsome little town, so full of sad memories for you; where
you meet neither friends nor kindness; where they have bullied and
maligned you; where all these—these _magpies_ hate you because you are
good looking! You could go abroad this very spring, to Italy, Switzerland,
Spain!—to Spain, Zina, where the Alhambra is, and where the Guadalquiver
flows—no wretched little stream like this of ours!”

“But, one moment, mother; you talk as though I were married already, or at
least as if the prince had made me an offer!”

“Oh, no—oh dear, no! don’t bother yourself about that, my angel! I know
what I’m talking about! Let me proceed. I’ve said my ‘firstly;’ now, then,
for my ‘secondly!’ I understand, dear child, with what loathing you would
give your hand to that Mosgliakoff!——”

“I know, without your telling me so, that I shall never be _his_ wife!”
cried Zina, angrily, and with flashing eyes.

“If only you knew, my angel, how I understand and enter into your loathing
for him! It is dreadful to vow before the altar that you will love a man
whom you _cannot_ love—how dreadful to belong to one whom you cannot
esteem! And he insists on your _love_—he only marries you for love. I can
see it by the way he looks at you! Why deceive ourselves? I have suffered
from the same thing for twenty-five years; your father ruined me—he, so to
speak, sucked up my youth! You have seen my tears many a time!——”

“Father’s away in the country, don’t touch _him_, please!” said Zina.

“I know you always take his part! Oh, Zina, my very heart trembled within
me when I thought to arrange your marriage with Mosgliakoff for financial
reasons! I trembled for the consequences. But with the prince it is
different, you need not deceive him; you cannot be expected to give him
your _love_, not your _love_—oh, no! and he is not in a state to ask it of
you!”

“Good heavens, what nonsense! I do assure you you are in error from the
very first step—from the first and most important step! Understand, that I
do not care to make a martyr of myself for some unknown reason! Know,
also, that I shall not marry anyone at all; I shall remain a maid. You
have bitten my head off for the last two years because I would not marry.
Well, you must accept the fact, and make the best of it; that’s all I can
say, and so it shall be!”

“But Zina, darling—my Zina, don’t be so cross before you have heard me
out! What a hot-headed little person you are, to be sure! Let me show you
the matter from my point of view, and you’ll agree with me—you really
will! The prince will live a year—two at most; and surely it is better to
be a young widow than a decayed old maid! Not to mention the fact that you
will be a princess—free, rich, independent! I dare say you look with
contempt upon all these calculations—founded upon his death; but I am a
mother, and what mother will blame me for my foresight?

“And if you, my angel of kindness, are unwilling to marry, even now, out
of tenderness for that wretched boy’s feelings, oh, think, think how, by
marrying this prince, you will rejoice his heart and soothe and comfort
his soul! For if he has a single particle of commonsense, he must
understand that jealousy of this old man were _too_ absurd—_too_
ridiculous! He will understand that you marry him—for money, for
convenience; that stern necessity compels you to it!

“And lastly, he will understand that—that,—well I simply wish to say,
that, upon the prince’s death, you will be at liberty to marry whomsoever
you please.”

“That’s a truly simple arrangement! All I have to do is to marry this
prince, rob him of his money, and then count upon his death in order to
marry my lover! You are a clever arithmetician, mamma; you do your sums
and get your totals nicely. You wish to seduce me by offering me this! Oh,
I understand you, mamma—I understand you well! You cannot resist the
expression of your noble sentiments and exalted ideas, even in the
manufacture of a nasty business. Why can’t you say simply and
straightforwardly, ‘Zina, this is a dirty affair, but it will pay us, so
please agree with me?’ at all events, that would be candid and frank on
your part.”

“But, my dear child, why, _why_ look at it from this point of view? Why
look at it under the light of suspicion as _deceit_, and low cunning, and
covetousness? You consider my calculations as meanness, as deceit; but, by
all that is good and true, where is the meanness? Show me the deceit. Look
at yourself in the glass: you are so beautiful, that a kingdom would be a
fair price for you! And suddenly you, you, the possessor of this divine
beauty, sacrifice yourself, in order to soothe the last years of an old
man’s life! You would be like a beautiful star, shedding your light over
the evening of his days. You would be like the fresh green ivy, twining in
and about his old age; not the stinging nettle that this wretched woman at
his place is, fastening herself upon him, and thirstily sucking his blood!
Surely his money, his rank are not worthy of being put in the scales
beside _you_? Where is the meanness of it; where is the deceit of all
this? You don’t know what you are saying, Zina.”

“I suppose they _are_ worthy of being weighed against me, if I am to marry
a cripple for them! No, mother, however you look at it, it is deceit, and
you can’t get out of _that_!”

“On the contrary, my dear child, I can look at it from a high, almost from
an exalted—nay, Christian—point of view. You, yourself, told me once, in a
fit of temporary insanity of some sort, that you wished to be a sister of
charity. You had suffered; you said your heart could love no more. If,
then, you cannot love, turn your thoughts to the higher aspect of the
case. This poor old man has also suffered—he is unhappy. I have known him,
and felt the deepest sympathy towards him—akin to love,—for many a year.
Be his friend, his daughter, be his plaything, even, if you like; but warm
his old heart, and you are doing a good work—a virtuous, kind, noble work
of love.

“He may be funny to look at; don’t think of that. He’s but half a man—pity
him! You are a Christian girl—do whatever is right by him; and this will
be medicine for your own heart-wounds; employment, action, all this will
heal you too, and where is the deceit here? But you do not believe me.
Perhaps you think that I am deceiving myself when I thus talk of duty and
of action. You think that I, a woman of the world, have no right to good
feeling and the promptings of duty and virtue. Very well, do not trust me,
if you like: insult me, do what you please to your poor mother; but you
will have to admit that her words carry the stamp of good sense,—they are
saving words! Imagine that someone else is talking to you, not I. Shut
your eyes, and fancy that some invisible being is speaking. What is
worrying you is the idea that all this is for money—a sort of sale or
purchase. Very well, then _refuse_ the money, if it is so loathsome to
your eyes. Leave just as much as is absolutely necessary for yourself, and
give the rest to the poor. Help _him_, if you like, the poor fellow who
lies there a-dying!”

“He would never accept my help!” muttered Zina, as though to herself.

“He would not, but his mother would!” said Maria Alexandrovna. “She would
take it, and keep her secret. You sold your ear-rings, a present from your
aunt, half a year or so ago, and helped her; _I_ know all about it! I
know, too, that the woman washes linen in order to support her unfortunate
son!”

“He will soon be where he requires no more help!”

“I know, I understand your hints.” Maria Alexandrovna sighed a real sigh.
“They say he is in a consumption, and must die.

“But _who_ says so?

“I asked the doctor the other day, because, having a tender heart, Zina, I
felt interested in the poor fellow. The doctor said that he was convinced
the malady was _not_ consumption; that it was dangerous, no doubt, but
still _not_ consumption, only some severe affection of the lungs. Ask him
yourself! He certainly told me that under different conditions—change of
climate and of his style of living,—the sick man might well recover. He
said—and I have read it too, somewhere, that off Spain there is a
wonderful island, called Malaga—I think it was Malaga; anyhow, the name
was like some wine, where, not only ordinary sufferers from chest
maladies, but even consumptive patients, recover entirely, solely by
virtue of the climate, and that sick people go there on purpose to be
cured.

“Oh, but Spain—the Alhambra alone—and the lemons, and the riding on mules.
All this is enough in itself to impress a poetical nature. You think he
would not accept your help, your money—for such a journey? Very
well—deceit is permissible where it may save a man’s life.

“Give him hope, too! Promise him your love; promise to marry him when you
are a widow! Anything in the world can be said with care and tact! Your
own mother would not counsel you to an ignoble deed, Zina. You will do as
I say, to save this boy’s life; and with this object, everything is
permissible! You will revive his hope; he will himself begin to think of
his health, and listen to what the doctor says to him. He will do his best
to resuscitate his dead happiness; and if he gets well again, even if you
never marry him, you will have saved him—raised him from the dead!

“I can look at him with some sympathy. I admit I can, now! Perhaps sorrow
has changed him for the better; and I say frankly, if he should be worthy
of you when you become a widow, marry him, by all means! You will be rich
then, and independent. You can not only cure him, but, having done so, you
can give him position in the world—a career! Your marriage to him will
then be possible and pardonable, not, as now, an absolute impossibility!

“For what would become of both of you were you to be capable of such
madness _now_? Universal contempt, beggary; smacking little boys, which is
part of his duty; the reading of Shakespeare; perpetual, hopeless life in
Mordasoff; and lastly his certain death, which will undoubtedly take place
before long unless he is taken away from here!

“While, if you resuscitate him—if you raise him from the dead, as it were,
you raise him to a good, useful, and virtuous life! He may then enter
public life—make himself rank, and a name! At the least, even if he must
die, he will die happy, at peace with himself, in your arms—for he will be
by then assured of your love and forgiveness of the past, and lying
beneath the scent of myrtles and lemons, beneath the tropical sky of the
South. Oh, Zina, all this is within your grasp, and all—all is _gain_.
Yes, and all to be had by merely marrying this prince.”

Maria Alexandrovna broke off, and for several minutes there was silence;
not a word was said on either side: Zina was in a state of indescribable
agitation. I say indescribable because I will not attempt to describe
Zina’s feelings: I cannot guess at them; but I _think_ that Maria
Alexandrovna had found the road to her heart.

Not knowing how her words had sped with her daughter, Maria Alexandrovna
now began to work her busy brain to imagine and prepare herself for every
possible humour that Zina might prove to be in; but at last she concluded
that she had happened upon the right track after all. Her rude hand had
touched the sorest place in Zina’s heart, but her crude and absurd
sentimental twaddle had not blinded her daughter. “However, that doesn’t
matter”—thought the mother. “All I care to do is to make her _think_; I
wish my ideas to stick!” So she reflected, and she gained her end; the
effect was made—the arrow reached the mark. Zina had listened hungrily as
her mother spoke; her cheeks were burning, her breast heaved.

“Listen, mother,” she said at last, with decision; though the sudden
pallor of her face showed clearly what the decision had cost her. “Listen
mother——” But at this moment a sudden noise in the entrance hall, and a
shrill female voice, asking for Maria Alexandrovna, interrupted Zina,
while her mother jumped up from her chair.

“Oh! the devil fly away with this magpie of a woman!” cried the latter
furiously. “Why, I nearly drove her out by force only a fortnight ago!”
she added, almost in despair. “I can’t, I can’t receive her now. Zina,
this question is too important to be put off: she must have news for me or
she never would have dared to come. I won’t receive the old —— Oh! _how_
glad I am to see you, dear Sophia Petrovna. What lucky chance brought
_you_ to see me? What a _charming_ surprise!” said Maria Alexandrovna,
advancing to receive her guest.

Zina escaped out of the room.





CHAPTER VI.


Mrs. Colonel Tarpuchin, or Sophia Petrovna, was only morally like a
magpie; she was more akin to the sparrow tribe, viewed physically. She was
a little bit of a woman of fifty summers or so, with lively eyes, and
yellow patches all over her face. On her little wizened body and spare
limbs she wore a black silk dress, which was perpetually on the rustle:
for this little woman could never sit still for an instant.

This was the most inveterate and bitterest scandal-monger in the town. She
took her stand on the fact that she was a Colonel’s wife, though she often
fought with her husband, the Colonel, and scratched his face handsomely on
such occasions.

Add to this, that it was her custom to drink four glasses of “vodki” at
lunch, or earlier, and four more in the evening; and that she hated Mrs.
Antipova to madness.

“I’ve just come in for a minute, _mon ange_,” she panted; “it’s no use
sitting down—no time! I wanted to let you know what’s going on, simply
that the whole town has gone mad over this prince. Our ‘beauties,’ you
know what I mean! are all after him, fishing for him, pulling him about,
giving him champagne—you would not believe it! _would_ you now? How on
earth you could ever have let him out of the house, I can’t understand!
Are you aware that he’s at Natalia Dimitrievna’s at this moment?”

“At _Natalia Dimitrievna’s_?” cried Maria Alexandrovna jumping up. “Why,
he was only going to see the Governor, and then call in for one moment at
the Antipova’s!”

“Oh, yes, just for one moment—of course! Well, catch him if you can,
there! That’s all I can say. He found the Governor ‘out,’ and went on to
Mrs. Antipova’s, where he has promised to dine. There Natalia caught
him—she is never away from Mrs. Antipova nowadays,—and persuaded him to
come away with her to lunch. So there’s your prince! catch him if you
can!”

“But how—Mosgliakoff’s with him—he promised—”

“Mosgliakoff, indeed,—why, he’s gone too! and they’ll be playing at cards
and clearing him out before he knows where he is! And the things Natalia
is saying, too—out loud if you please! She’s telling the prince to his
face that you, _you_ have got hold of him with certain views—_vous
comprenez_?”

“She calmly tells him this to his face! Of course he doesn’t understand a
word of it, and simply sits there like a soaked cat, and says ‘Ye—yes!’
And would you believe it, she has trotted out her Sonia—a girl of fifteen,
in a dress down to her knees—my word on it? Then she has sent for that
little orphan—Masha; she’s in a short dress too,—why, I swear it doesn’t
reach her knees. I looked at it carefully through my pince-nez! She’s
stuck red caps with some sort of feathers in them on their heads, and set
them to dance some silly dance to the piano accompaniment for the prince’s
benefit! You know his little weakness as to our sex,—well, you can imagine
him staring at them through his glass and saying, ‘_Charmant!_—What
figures!’ Tfu! They’ve turned the place into a music hall! Call that a
dance! I was at school at Madame Jarne’s, I know, and there were plenty of
princesses and countesses there with me, too; and I know I danced before
senators and councillors, and earned their applause, too: but as for this
dance—it’s a low can-can, and nothing more! I simply _burned_ with
shame,—I couldn’t stand it, and came out.”

“How! have you been at Natalia Dimitrievna’s? Why, you——!”

“What!—she offended me last week? is that what you you mean? Oh, but, my
dear, I _had_ to go and have a peep at the prince—else, when should I have
seen him? As if I would have gone _near_ her but for this wretched old
prince. Imagine—chocolate handed round and _me left out_. I’ll let her
have it for that, some day! Well, good-bye, _mon ange_: I must hurry off
to Akulina, and let her know all about it. You may say good-bye to the
prince; he won’t come near you again now! He has no memory left, you know,
and Mrs. Antipova will simply carry him off bodily to her house. He’ll
think it’s all right——They’re all afraid of you, you know; they think that
you want to get hold of him—you understand! Zina, you know!”

“_Quelle horreur!_”

“Oh, yes, I know! I tell you—the whole town is talking about it! Mrs.
Antipova is going to make him stay to dinner—and then she’ll just keep
him! She’s doing it to spite _you_, my angel. I had a look in at her back
premises. _Such_ arrangements, my dear. Knives clattering, people running
about for champagne. I tell you what you must do—go and grab him as he
comes out from Natalia Dimitrievna’s to Antipova’s to dinner. He promised
_you_ first, he’s _your_ guest. Tfu! don’t you be laughed at by this brace
of chattering magpies—good for nothing baggage, both of them. ‘Procuror’s
lady,’ indeed! Why, I’m a Colonel’s wife. Tfu!—_Mais adieu, mon ange_. I
have my own sledge at the door, or I’d go with you.”

Having got rid of this walking newspaper, Maria Alexandrovna waited a
moment, to free herself of a little of her super-abundant agitation. Mrs.
Colonel’s advice was good and practical. There was no use losing
time,—none to lose, in fact. But the greatest difficulty of all was as yet
unsettled.

Maria Alexandrovna flew to Zina’s room.

Zina was walking up and down, pale, with hands folded and head bent on her
bosom: there were tears in her eyes, but Resolve was there too, and
sparkled in the glance which she threw on her mother as the latter entered
the room. She hastily dried her tears, and a sarcastic smile played on her
lips once more.

“Mamma,” she began, anticipating her mother’s speech “you have already
wasted much of your eloquence over me—too much! But you have not blinded
me; I am not a child. To do the work of a sister of mercy, without the
slightest call thereto,—to justify one’s meanness—meanness proceeding in
reality from the purest egotism, by attributing to it noble ends,—all this
is a sort of Jesuitism which cannot deceive _me_. Listen! I repeat, all
_this could not deceive me_, and I wish you to understand that!”

“But, dearest child!” began her mother, in some alarm.

“Be quiet, mamma; have patience, and hear me out. In spite of the full
consciousness that all this is pure Jesuitism, and in spite of my full
knowledge of the absolutely ignoble character of such an act, I accept
your proposition in full,—you hear me—_in full_; and inform you hereby,
that I am ready to marry the prince. More! I am ready to help you to the
best of my power in your endeavours to lure the prince into making me an
offer. Why do I do this? You need not know that; enough that I have
consented. I have consented to the whole thing—to bringing him his boots,
to serving him; I will dance for him, that my meanness may be in some sort
atoned. I shall do all I possibly can so that he shall never regret that
he married me! But in return for my consent I insist upon knowing _how_
you intend to bring the matter about? Since you have spoken so warmly on
the subject—I know you!—I am convinced you must have some definite plan of
operation in your head. Be frank for once in your life; your candour is
the essential condition upon which alone I give my consent. I shall not
decide until you have told me what I require!”

Maria Alexandrovna was so surprised by the unexpected conclusion at which
Zina arrived, that she stood before the latter some little while, dumb
with amazement, and staring at her with all her eyes. Prepared to have to
combat the stubborn romanticism of her daughter—whose obstinate nobility
of character she always feared,—she had suddenly heard this same daughter
consent to all that her mother had required of her.

Consequently, the matter had taken a very different complexion. Her eyes
sparkled with delight:

“Zina, Zina!” she cried; “you are my life, my——”

She could say no more, but fell to embracing and kissing her daughter.

“Oh, mother, I don’t _want_ all this kissing!” cried Zina, with impatience
and disgust. “I don’t need all this rapture on your part; all I want is a
plain answer to my question!”

“But, Zina, I love you; I adore you, darling, and you repel me like this!
I am working for your happiness, child!”

Tears sparkled in her eyes. Maria Alexandrovna really loved her daughter,
in her own way, and just now she actually felt deeply, for once in her
life—thanks to her agitation, and the success of her eloquence.

Zina, in spite of her present distorted view of things in general, knew
that her mother loved her; but this love only annoyed her; she would much
rather—it would have been easier for her—if it had been hate!

“Well, well; don’t be angry, mamma—I’m so excited just now!” she said, to
soothe her mother’s feelings.

“I’m not angry, I’m not angry, darling! I know you are much agitated!”
cried Maria Alexandrovna. “You say, my child, that you wish me to be
candid: very well, I will; I will be _quite_ frank, I assure you. But you
might have trusted me! Firstly, then, I must tell you that I have no
actually organized plan yet—no _detailed_ plan, that is. You must
understand, with that clever little head of yours, you must see, Zina,
that I _cannot_ have such a plan, all cut out. I even anticipate some
difficulties. Why, that magpie of a woman has just been telling me all
sorts of things. We ought to be quick, by the bye; you see, I am quite
open with you! But I swear to you that the end shall be attained!” she
added, ecstatically. “My convictions are not the result of a poetical
nature, as you told me just now; they are founded on facts. I rely on the
weakness of the prince’s intellect—which is a canvas upon which one can
stitch any pattern one pleases!

“The only fear is, we may be interfered with! But a fool of a woman like
that is not going to get the better of _me_!” she added, stamping her
foot, and with flashing eyes. “That’s my part of the business, though; and
to manage it thoroughly I must begin as soon as possible—in fact, the
whole thing, or the most important part of it, must be arranged this very
day!”

“Very well, mamma; but now listen to one more piece of candour. Do you
know why I am so interested in your plan of operations, and do not trust
it? because I am not sure of myself! I have told you already that I
consent to this——meanness; but I must warn you that if I find the details
of your plan of operations _too_ dirty, too mean and repulsive, I shall
not be able to stand it, and shall assuredly throw you over. I know that
this is a new pettiness, to consent to a wicked thing and then fear the
dirt in which it floats! But what’s to be done? So it will be, and I warn
you!”

“But Zina, dear child, where is the wickedness in this?” asked Maria
Alexandrovna timidly. “It is simply a matter of a marriage for profit;
everybody does it! Look at it in this light, and you will see there is
nothing particular in it; it is good ‘form’ enough!”

“Oh, mamma, don’t try to play the fox over me! Don’t you see that I have
consented to everything—to _everything_? What else do you require of me?
Don’t be alarmed if I call things by their proper names! For all you know
it may be my only comfort!” And a bitter smile played over her lips.

“Very well, very well, dear! we may disagree as to ideas and yet be very
fond of one another. But if you are afraid of the working of my plan, and
dread that you will see any baseness or meanness about it, leave it all to
me, dear, and I guarantee you that not a particle of dirt shall soil you!
Your hands shall be clean! As if I would be the one to compromise you!
Trust me entirely, and all shall go grandly and with dignity; all shall be
done worthily; there shall be no scandal—even if there be a whisper
afterwards, we shall all be out of the way, far off! We shall not stay
here, of course! Let them _howl_ if they like, _we_ won’t care. Besides,
they are not worth bothering about, and I wonder at your being so
frightened of these people, Zina. Don’t be angry with me! how can you be
so frightened, with your proud nature?”

“I’m not frightened; you don’t understand me a bit!” said Zina, in a tone
of annoyance.

“Very well, darling; don’t be angry. I only talk like this because these
people about here are always stirring up mud, if they can; while you—this
is the first time in your life you have done a mean action.—_Mean_ action!
What an old fool I am! On the contrary, this is a most generous, _noble_
act! I’ll prove this to you once more, Zina. Firstly, then, it all depends
upon the point of view you take up——”

“Oh! bother your proofs, mother. I’ve surely had enough of them by now,”
cried Zina angrily, and stamped her foot on the floor.

“Well, darling, I won’t; it was stupid of me—I won’t!”

There was another moment’s silence. Maria Alexandrovna looked into her
daughter’s eyes as a little dog looks into the eyes of its mistress.

“I don’t understand how you are going to set about it,” said Zina at last,
in a tone of disgust. “I feel sure you will only plunge yourself into a
pool of shame! I’m not thinking of these people about here. I despise
their opinions; but it would be very ignominious for _you_.”

“Oh! if that’s all, my dear child, don’t bother your head about it:
please, _please_ don’t! Let us be agreed about it, and then you need not
fear for me. Dear me! if you but knew, though, what things I have done,
and kept my skin whole! I tell you this is _nothing_ in comparison with
_real_ difficulties which I have arranged successfully. Only let me try.
But, first of all we must get the prince _alone_, and that as soon as
possible. That’s the first move: all the rest will depend upon the way we
manage this. However, I can foresee the result. They’ll all rise against
us; but I’ll manage _them_ all right! I’m a little nervous about
Mosgliakoff. He——”

“Mosgliakoff!” said Zina, contemptuously.

“Yes, but don’t you be afraid, Zina! I’ll give you my word I’ll work him
so that he shall help us himself. You don’t know me yet, my Zina. My
child, when I heard about this old prince having arrived this morning, the
idea, as it were, shone out all at once in my brain! Who would have
thought of his really coming to us like this! It is a chance such as you
might wait for a thousand years in vain. Zina, my angel! there’s no shame
in what you are doing. What _is_ wrong is to marry a man whom you loathe.
Your marriage with the prince will be no _real_ marriage; it is simply a
domestic contract. It is he, the old fool, who gains by it. It is _he_ who
is made unspeakably, immeasurably happy. Oh! Zina, how lovely you look
to-day. If I were a man I would give you half a kingdom if you but raised
your finger for it! _Asses_ they all are! Who wouldn’t kiss a hand like
this?” and Maria Alexandrovna kissed her daughter’s hand warmly. “Why,
this is my own flesh and blood, Zina. What’s to be done afterwards? You
won’t part with me, will you? You won’t drive your old mother away when
you are happy yourself? No, darling, for though we have quarrelled often
enough, you have not such another friend as I am, Zina! You——”

“Mamma, if you’ve made up your mind to it all, perhaps it is time you set
about making some move in the matter. We are losing time,” said Zina,
impatiently.

“Yes, it is, it is indeed time; and here am I gabbling on while they are
all doing their best to seduce the prince away from us. I must be off at
once. I shall find them, and bring the prince back by force, if need be.
Good-bye, Zina, darling child. Don’t be afraid, and don’t look sad, dear;
please don’t! It will be all well, nay, _gloriously_ well! Good-bye,
good-bye!”

Maria Alexandrovna made the sign of the Cross over Zina, and dashed out of
the room. She stopped one moment at her looking-glass to see that all was
right, and then, in another minute, was seated in her carriage and
careering through the Mordasoff streets. Maria Alexandrovna lived in good
style, and her carriage was always in waiting at that hour in case of
need.

“No, no, my dears! it’s not for _you_ to outwit me,” she thought, as she
drove along. “Zina agrees; so half the work is done. Oh, Zina, Zina! so
your imagination is susceptible to pretty little visions, is it? and I
_did_ treat her to a pretty little picture. She was really touched at
last; and how lovely the child looked to-day! If I had her beauty I should
turn half Europe topsy-turvy. But wait a bit, it’s all right. Shakespeare
will fly away to another world when you’re a princess, my dear, and know a
few people. What does she know? Mordasoff and the tutor! And what a
princess she will make. I _love_ to see her pride and pluck. She looks at
you like any queen. And not to know her own good! However, she soon will.
Wait a bit; let this old fool die, and then the boy, and I’ll marry her to
a reigning prince yet! The only thing I’m afraid of is—haven’t I trusted
her too much? Didn’t I allow my feelings to run away with me too far? I am
anxious about her. I am anxious, anxious!”

Thus Maria Alexandrovna reflected as she drove along. She was a busy
woman, was Maria Alexandrovna.

Zina, left alone, continued her solitary walk up and down the room with
folded hands and thoughtful brow. She had a good deal to think of! Over
and over again she repeated, “It’s time—it’s time—oh, it’s time!” What did
this ejaculation mean? Once or twice tears glistened on her long silken
eyelashes, and she did not attempt to wipe them away.

Her mother worried herself in vain, as far as Zina was concerned; for her
daughter had quite made up her mind:—she was ready, come what might!

“Wait a bit!” said the widow to herself, as she picked her way out of her
hiding-place, after having observed and listened to the interview between
Zina and her mother. “And I was thinking of a wedding dress for myself; I
positively thought the prince would really come my way! So much for _my_
wedding dress—what a fool I was! Oho! Maria Alexandrovna—I’m a baggage, am
I—and a beggar;—and I took a bribe of two hundred roubles from you, did I?
And I didn’t spend it on expenses connected with your precious daughter’s
letter, did I? and break open a desk for your sake with my own hands! Yes,
madam; I’ll teach you what sort of a baggage Nastasia Petrovna is; both of
you shall know her a little better yet! Wait a bit!”





CHAPTER VII.


Maria Alexandrovna’s genius had conceived a great and daring project.

To marry her daughter to a rich man, a prince, and a cripple; to marry her
secretly, to take advantage of the senile feebleness of her guest, to
marry her daughter to this old man _burglariously_, as her enemies would
call it,—was not only a daring, it was a downright audacious, project.

Of course, in case of success, it would be a profitable undertaking
enough; but in the event of _non_-success, what an ignominious position
for the authors of such a failure.

Maria Alexandrovna knew all this, but she did not despair. She had been
through deeper mire than this, as she had rightly informed Zina.

Undoubtedly all this looked rather too like a robbery on the high road to
be altogether pleasant; but Maria Alexandrovna did not dwell much on this
thought. She had one very simple but very pointed notion on the subject:
namely, this—“_once married they can’t be unmarried again_.”

It was a simple, but very pleasant reflection, and the very thought of it
gave Maria Alexandrovna a tingling sensation in all her limbs. She was in
a great state of agitation, and sat in her carriage as if on pins and
needles. She was anxious to begin the fray: her grand plan of operations
was drawn up; but there were thousands of small details to be settled, and
these must depend upon circumstances. She was not agitated by fear of
failure—oh dear, no! all she minded was delay! she feared the delay and
obstructions that might be put in her way by the Mordasoff ladies, whose
pretty ways she knew so well! She was well aware that probably at this
moment the whole town knew all about her present intentions, though she
had not revealed them to a living soul. She had found out by painful
experience that nothing, not the most secret event, could happen in her
house in the morning but it was known at the farthest end of the town by
the evening.

Of course, no anticipation, no presentiment, deterred or deceived Maria
Alexandrovna: she might feel such sensations at times, but she despised
them. Now, this is what had happened in the town this morning, and of
which our heroine was as yet only partly informed. About mid-day, that is,
just three hours after the prince’s arrival at Mordasoff, extraordinary
rumours began to circulate about the town.

Whence came they? Who spread them? None could say; but they spread like
wild-fire. Everyone suddenly began to assure his neighbour that Maria
Alexandrovna had engaged her daughter to the prince; that Mosgliakoff had
notice to quit, and that all was settled and signed, and the penniless,
twenty-three-year-old Zina was to be the princess.

Whence came this rumour? Could it be that Maria Alexandrovna was so
thoroughly known that her friends could anticipate her thoughts and
actions under any given circumstances?

The fact is, every inhabitant of a provincial town lives under a glass
case; there is no possibility of his keeping anything whatever secret from
his honourable co-dwellers in the place. They know _everything_; they know
it, too, better than he does himself. Every provincial person should be a
psychologist by nature; and that is why I have been surprised, often and
often, to observe when I am among provincials that there is not a great
number of psychologists—as one would expect,—but an infinite number of
dreadful asses. However, this a digression.

The rumour thus spread, then, was a thunder-like and startling shock to
the Mordasoff system. Such a marriage—a marriage with this prince—appeared
to all to be a thing so very desirable, so brilliant, that the strange
side of the affair had not seemed to strike anyone as yet!

One more circumstance must be noticed. Zina was even more detested in the
place than her mother; why, I don’t know. Perhaps her beauty was the prime
cause. Perhaps, too, it was that Maria Alexandrovna was, as it were, one
of themselves, a fruit of their own soil: if she was to go away she might
even be missed; she kept the place alive more or less—it might be dull
without her! But with Zina it was quite a different matter: she lived more
in the clouds than in the town of Mordasoff. She was no company for these
good people; she could not pair with them. Perhaps she bore herself
towards them, unconsciously though, too haughtily.

And now this same Zina, this haughty girl, about whom there were certain
scandalous stories afloat, this same Zina was to become a millionaire, a
princess, and a woman of rank and eminence!

In a couple of years she might marry again, some duke, perhaps, or a
general, maybe a Governor; their own Governor was a widower, and very fond
of the ladies! Then she would be the first lady of their province! Why,
the very thought of such a thing would be intolerable: in fact, this
rumour of Zina’s marriage with the prince aroused more irritation in
Mordasoff than any other piece of gossip within the memory of man!

People told each other that it was a sin and a shame, that the prince was
crazy, that the old man was being deceived, caught, robbed—anything you
like; that the prince must be saved from the bloodthirsty talons he had
floundered into; that the thing was simply robbery, immorality. And why
were any others worse than Zina? Why should not somebody else marry the
prince?

Maria Alexandrovna only guessed at all this at present—but that was quite
enough. She knew that the whole town would rise up and use all and every
means to defeat her ends. Why, they had tried to “confiscate” the prince
already; she would have to retrieve him by force, and if she should
succeed in luring or forcing him back now, she could not keep him tied to
her apron-strings for ever. Again, what was to prevent this whole troop of
Mordasoff gossips from coming _en masse_ to her salon, under such a
plausible plea, too, that she would not be able to turn them out. She knew
well that if kicked out of the door these good people would get in at the
window—a thing which had actually happened before now at Mordasoff.

In a word, there was not an hour, not a moment to be lost; and meanwhile
things were not even begun. A brilliant idea now struck Maria
Alexandrovna. We shall hear what this idea was in its proper place,
meanwhile I will only state that my heroine dashed through the streets of
Mordasoff, looking like a threatening storm-cloud as she swept along full
of the stern and implacable resolve that the prince should come back if
she had to drag him, and fight for him; and that all Mordasoff might fall
in ruins but she should have her way!

Her first move was successful—it could not have been more so.

She chanced to meet the prince in the street, and carried him off to
dinner with her.

If my reader wishes to know _how_ this feat was accomplished with such a
circle of enemies about and around her, and how she managed to make such a
fool of Mrs. Antipova, then I must be allowed to point out that such a
question is an insult to Maria Alexandrovna. As if _she_ were not capable
of outwitting any Antipova that ever breathed!

She simply “arrested” the prince at her rival’s very door, as he alighted
there with Mosgliakoff, in spite of the latter’s terror of a scandal, and
in spite of everything else; and she popped the old man into the carriage
beside her. Of course the prince made very little resistance, and as
usual, forgot all about the episode in a couple of minutes, and was as
happy as possible.

At dinner he was hilarious to a degree; he made jokes and fun, and told
stories which had no ends, or which he tacked on to ends belonging to
other stories, without remarking the fact.

He had had three glasses of champagne at lunch at Natalie Dimitrievna’s.
He now took more wine, and his old head whirled with it. Maria
Alexandrovna plied him well. The dinner was very good: the mistress of the
house kept the company alive with most bewitching airs and manners,—at
least so it should have been, but all excepting herself and the prince
were terribly dull on this occasion. Zina sat silent and grave.
Mosgliakoff was clearly off his feed: he was very thoughtful; and as this
was unusual Maria Alexandrovna was considerably anxious about him. The
widow looked cross and cunning; she continually made mysterious signs to
Mosgliakoff on the sly; but the latter took no notice of them.

If the mistress herself had not been so amiable and bewitching, the dinner
party might have been mistaken for a lunch at a funeral!

Meanwhile Maria Alexandrovna’s condition of mind was in reality excited
and agitated to a terrible degree. Zina alone terrified her by her tragic
look and tearful eyes. And there was another difficulty—for that accursed
Mosgliakoff would probably sit about and get in the way of business! One
could not well set about it with him in the room!

So, Maria Alexandrovna rose from the table in some agitation.

But what was her amazement, her joyful surprise, when Mosgliakoff came up
to her after dinner, of his own accord, and suddenly and most unexpectedly
informed her that he must—to his infinite regret—leave the house on
important business for a short while.

“Why, where are you going to?” she asked, with great show of regret.

“Well, you see,” began Mosgliakoff, rather disconcerted and uncomfortable,
“I have to—_may_ I come to you for advice?”

“What is it—what is it?”

“Why, you see, my godfather Borodueff—you know the man; I met him in the
street to-day, and he is dreadfully angry with me, says I am grown so
_proud_, that though I have been in Mordasoff three times I have never
shown my nose inside his doors. He asked me to come in for a cup of tea at
five—it’s four now. He has no children, you know,—and he is worth a
million of roubles—_more_, they say; and if I marry Zina—you see,—and he’s
seventy years old now!”

“Why, my good boy, of course, of course!—what are you thinking of? You
must not neglect that sort of thing—go at once, of course! I _thought_ you
looked preoccupied at dinner. You ought to have gone this morning and
shewn him that you cared for him, and so on. Oh, you boys, you boys!”
cried Maria Alexandrovna with difficulty concealing her joy.

“Thanks, thanks, Maria Alexandrovna! you’ve made a man of me again! I
declare I quite feared telling you—for I know you didn’t think much of the
connection.—He is a common sort of old fellow, I know! So good-bye—my
respects to Zina, and apologies—I must be off, of course I shall be back
soon!”

“Good-bye—take my blessing with you; say something polite to the old man
for me; I have long changed my opinion of him; I have grown to like the
real old Russian style of the man. _Au revoir, mon ami, au revoir!_”

“Well, it _is_ a mercy that the devil has carried him off, out of the
way!” she reflected, flushing with joy as Paul took his departure out of
the room. But Paul had only just reached the hall and was putting on his
fur coat when to him appeared—goodness knows whence—the widow, Nastasia
Petrovna. She had been waiting for him.

“Where are you going to?” she asked, holding him by the arm.

“To my godfather Borodueff’s—a rich old fellow; I want him to leave me
money. Excuse me—I’m in rather a hurry!”

Mosgliakoff was in a capital humour!

“Oh! then say good-bye to your betrothed!” remarked the widow, cuttingly.

“And why ‘good-bye’?”

“Why; you think she’s yours already, do you? and they are going to marry
her to the prince! I heard them say so myself!”

“To the prince? Oh, come now, Nastasia Petrovna!”

“Oh, it’s not a case of ’come now’ at all! Would you like to see and hear
it for yourself? Put down your coat, and come along here,—this way!”

“Excuse me, Nastasia Petrovna, but I don’t understand what you are driving
at!”

“Oh! you’ll understand fast enough if you just bend down here and listen!
The comedy is probably just beginning!”

“What comedy?”

“Hush! don’t talk so loud! The comedy of humbugging _you_. This morning,
when you went away with the prince, Maria Alexandrovna spent a whole hour
talking Zina over into marrying the old man! She told her that nothing was
easier than to lure the prince into marrying her; and all sorts of other
things that were enough to make one sick! Zina agreed. You should have
heard the pretty way in which _you_ were spoken of! They think you simply
a fool! Zina said plump out that she would never marry you! Listen now,
listen!”

“Why—why—it would be most godless cunning,” Paul stammered, looking
sheepishly into Nastasia’s eyes.

“Well, just you listen—you’ll hear that, and more besides!”

“But how am I to listen?”

“Here, bend down here. Do you see that keyhole!”

“Oh! but, Nastasia Petrovna, I can’t eavesdrop, you know!”

“Oh, nonsense, nonsense! Put your pride in your pocket! You’ve come, and
you must listen now!”

“Well, at all events——”

“Oh! if you can’t bear to be an eavesdropper, let it alone, and be made a
fool of! One goes out of one’s way solely out of pity for you, and you
must needs make difficulties! What is it to me? I’m not doing this for
myself! _I_ shall leave the house before night, in any case!”

Paul, steeling his heart, bent to the keyhole.

His pulses were raging and throbbing. He did not realise what was going
on, or what he was doing, or where he was.





CHAPTER VIII.


“So you were very gay, prince, at Natalia Dimitrievna’s?” asked Maria
Alexandrovna, surveying the battlefield before her; she was anxious to
begin the conversation as innocently as possible; but her heart beat loud
with hope and agitation.

After dinner the Prince had been carried off to the salon, where he was
first received in the morning. Maria Alexandrovna prided herself on this
room, and always used it on state occasions.

The old man, after his six glasses of champagne, was not very steady on
his legs; but he talked away all the more, for the same reason.

Surveying the field of battle before the fray, Maria Alexandrovna had
observed with satisfaction that the voluptuous old man had already begun
to regard Zina with great tenderness, and her maternal heart beat high
with joy.

“Oh! ch—charming—very gay indeed!” replied the prince, “and, do you know,
Nat—alia Dimitrievna is a wo—wonderful woman, a ch—charming woman!”

Howsoever busy with her own high thoughts and exalted ideas, Maria
Alexandrovna’s heart waxed wrathful to hear such a loud blast of praise on
her rival’s account.

“Oh! Prince,” she began, with flashing eyes, “if Natalia Dimitrievna is a
charming woman in your eyes, then I really don’t know _what_ to think!
After such a statement, dear Prince, you must not claim to know society
here—no, no!”

“Really! You sur—pr—prise me!”

“I assure you—I assure you, _mon cher_ Prince! Listen Zina, I must just
tell the prince that absurd story about what Natalia Dimitrievna did when
she was here last week. Dearest prince, I am not a scandal-monger, but I
must, I really _must_ tell you this, if only to make you laugh, and to
show you a living picture, as it were, of what people are like in this
place! Well, last week this Natalia Dimitrievna came to call upon me.
Coffee was brought in, and I had to leave the room for a moment—I forget
why—at all events, I went out. Now, I happened to have remarked how much
sugar there was in the silver sugar basin; it was quite full. Well, I came
back in a few minutes—looked at the sugar basin, and!——three lumps—three
little wretched lumps at the very bottom of the basin, prince!—and she was
all alone in the room, mind! Now that woman has a large house of her own,
and lots of money! Of course this is merely a funny story—but you can
judge from this what sort of people one has to deal with here!”

“N—no! you don’t mean it!” said the prince, in real astonishment. “What a
gr—eedy woman! Do you mean to say she ate it all up?”

“There, prince, and that’s your ‘charming woman!’ What do you think of
_that_ nice little bit of lady-like conduct? I think I should have died of
shame if I had ever allowed myself to do such a dirty thing as that!”

“Ye—yes, ye—yes! but, do you know, she is a real ‘_belle femme_’ all the
same!”

“What! Natalia Dimitrievna? My dear prince; why, she is a mere tub of a
woman! Oh! prince, prince! what have you said? I expected far better taste
of _you_, prince!”

“Ye—yes, tub—tub, of course! but she’s a n—nice figure, a nice figure! And
the girl who danced—oh! a nice figure too, a very nice figure of a
wo—woman!”

“What, Sonia? Why she’s a mere child, prince? She’s only thirteen years
old.”

“Ye—yes, ye—yes, of course; but her figure de—velops very fast—charming,
charming! And the other da—ancing girl, she’s de—veloping too—nicely:
she’s dirty rather—she might have washed her hands, but very at—tractive,
charming!” and the prince raised his glass again and hungrily inspected
Zina. “_Mais quelle charmante personne!_—what a lovely girl!” he muttered,
melting with satisfaction.

“Zina, play us something, or—better still, sing us a song! How she sings,
prince! she’s an artiste—a real artiste; oh if you only knew, dear
prince,” continued Maria Alexandrovna, in a half whisper, as Zina rose to
go to the piano with her stately but quiet gait and queenly composure,
which evidently told upon the old man; “if you only knew what a daughter
that is to me! how she can love; how tender, how affectionate she is to
me! what taste she has, what a heart!”

“Ye—yes! ye—yes! taste. And do you know, I have only known one woman in
all my life who could compare with her in love—liness. It was the late
C—ountess Nainsky: she died thirty years ago, a w—onderful woman, and her
beauty was quite sur—passing. She married her co—ook at last.”

“Her cook, prince?”

“Ye—yes, her cook, a Frenchman, abroad. She bought him a count’s title
a—broad; he was a good-looking fellow enough, with little moustaches——”

“And how did they get on?”

“Oh, very well indeed; however, they p—arted very soon; they quarrelled
about some sa—sauce. He robbed her—and bo—olted.”

“Mamma, what shall I play?” asked Zina.

“Better sing us something, Zina. _How_ she sings, prince! Do you like
music?”

“Oh, ye—yes! charming, charming. I love music pass—sionately. I knew
Beethoven, abroad.”

“Knew Beethoven!” cried Maria Alexandrovna, ecstatically. “Imagine, Zina,
the prince knew Beethoven! Oh, prince, did you really, _really_ know the
great Beethoven?”

“Ye—yes, we were great friends, Beet—hoven and I; he was always taking
snuff—such a funny fellow!”

“What, Beethoven?”

“Yes, Beethoven; or it may have been some other German fellow—I don’t
know; there are a great many Germans there. I forget.”

“Well, what shall I sing, mamma?” asked Zina again.

“Oh Zina darling, do sing us that lovely ballad all about knights, you
know, and the girl who lived in a castle and loved a troubadour. Don’t you
know! Oh, prince, how I do _love_ all those knightly stories and songs,
and the castles! Oh! the castles, and life in the middle ages, and the
troubadours, and heralds and all. Shall I accompany you, Zina? Sit down
near here, prince. Oh! those castles, those castles!”

“Ye—yes, ye—yes, castles; I love ca—astles too!” observed the prince,
staring at Zina all the while with the whole of his one eye, as if he
would like to eat her up at once. “But, good heavens,” he cried, “that
song! I know that s—song. I heard that song years—years ago! Oh! how that
song reminds me of so—omething. Oh, oh.”

I will not attempt to describe the ecstatic state of the prince while Zina
sang.

She warbled an old French ballad which had once been all the fashion. Zina
sang it beautifully; her lovely face, her glorious eyes, her fine sweet
contralto voice, all this went to the prince’s heart at once; and her dark
thick hair, her heaving bosom, her proud, beautiful, stately figure as she
sat at the piano, and played and sang, quite finished him. He never took
his eyes off her, he panted with excitement. His old heart, partially
revivified with champagne, with the music, and with awakening
recollections (and who is there who has no beloved memories of the past?),
his old heart beat faster and faster. It was long since it had last beat
in this way. He was ready to fall on his knees at her feet, when Zina
stopped singing, and he was almost in tears with various emotions.

“Oh, my charming, charming child,” he cried, putting his lips to her
fingers, “you have ra—vished me quite—quite! I remember all now. Oh
charming, charming child!——”

The poor prince could not finish his sentence.

Maria Alexandrovna felt that the moment had arrived for her to make a
move.

“Why, _why_ do you bury yourself alive as you do, prince?” she began,
solemnly. “So much taste, so much vital energy, so many rich gifts of the
mind and soul—and to hide yourself in solitude all your days; to flee from
mankind, from your friends. Oh, it is unpardonable! Prince, bethink
yourself. Look up at life again with open eyes. Call up your dear memories
of the past; think of your golden youth—your golden, careless, happy days
of youth! Wake them, wake them from the dead, Prince! and wake yourself,
too; and recommence life among men and women and society! Go abroad—to
Italy, to Spain, oh, to Spain, Prince! You must have a guide, a heart that
will love and respect, and sympathize with you! You have friends; summon
them about you! Give the word, and they will rally round you in crowds! I
myself will be the first to throw up everything, and answer to your cry! I
remembered our old friendship, my Prince; and I will sacrifice husband,
home, all, and follow you. Yes, and were I but young and lovely, like my
daughter here, I would be your fellow, your friend, your _wife_, if you
said but the word!”

“And I am convinced that you were a most charming creature in your day,
too!” said the prince, blowing his nose violently. His eyes were full of
tears.

“We live again in our children,” said Maria Alexandrovna, with great
feeling. “I, too, have my guardian angel, and that is this child, my
daughter, Prince, the partner of my heart and of all my thoughts! She has
refused seven offers because she is unwilling to leave me! So that she
will go too, when you accompany me abroad.”

“In that case, I shall certainly go abroad,” cried the prince with
animation. “As—suredly I shall go! And if only I could ve—venture to
hope—oh! you be—witching child, charming, be—witching child!” And the
prince recommenced to kiss Zina’s fingers. The poor old man was evidently
meditating going down on his knees before her.

“But, Prince,” began Maria Alexandrovna again, feeling that the
opportunity had arrived for another display of eloquence. “But, Prince,
you say, ‘If only I could flatter myself into indulging any hope!’ Why,
what a strange man you are, Prince. Surely you do not suppose that you are
unworthy the flattering attention of _any_ woman! It is not only youth
that constitutes true beauty. Remember that you are, so to speak, a chip
of the tree of aristocracy. You are a representative of all the most
knightly, most refined taste and culture and manners. Did not Maria fall
in love with the old man Mazeppa? I remember reading that Lauzun, that
fascinating marquis of the court of Louis (I forget which), when he was an
old, bent and bowed man, won the heart of one of the youngest and most
beautiful women about the court.

“And who told you you are an old man? Who taught you that nonsense? Do men
like you ever grow old? You, with your wealth of taste and wit, and
animation and vital energy and brilliant manners! Just you make your
appearance at some watering-place abroad with a young wife on your
arm—some lovely young girl like my Zina, for instance—of course I merely
mention her as an example, nothing more,—and you will see at once what a
colossal effect you will produce: you, a scion of our aristocracy; she a
beauty among beauties! You will lead her triumphantly on your arm; she,
perhaps, will sing in some brilliant assemblage; you will delight the
company with your wit. Why, all the people of the place will crowd to see
you! All Europe will ring with your renown, for every newspaper and
feuilleton at the Waters will be full of you. And yet you say, ‘If I could
but _venture_ to _hope_,’ indeed!”

“The feuilletons! yes—ye—yes, and the newspapers,” said the prince,
growing more and more feeble with love, but not understanding half of
Maria Alexandrovna’s tall talk. “But, my child, if you’re not tired, do
repeat that song which you have just sung so cha—armingly once more.”

“Oh! but, Prince, she has other lovely songs, still prettier ones; don’t
you remember _L’Hirondelle_? You must have heard it, haven’t you?”

“Ye—yes, I remember it; at least I’ve for—gotten it. No, no! the one you
have just sung. I don’t want the Hir—ondelle! I want that other song,”
whined the prince, just like any child.

Zina sang again.

This time the prince could not contain himself; he fell on his knees at
her feet, he cried, he sobbed:

“Oh, my beautiful _chatelaine_!” he cried in his shaky old voice—shaky
with old age and emotion combined. “Oh, my charming, charming
_chatelaine_! oh, my dear child! You have re—minded me of so much that is
long, long passed! I always thought then that things must be fairer in the
future than in the present. I used to sing duets with the vis—countess in
this very ballad! And now, oh! I don’t know what to do, I don’t know
_what_ to do!”

The prince panted and choked as he spoke; his tongue seemed to find it
difficult to move; some of his words were almost unintelligible. It was
clear that he was in the last stage of emotional excitement. Maria
Alexandrovna immediately poured oil on the fire.

“Why, Prince, I do believe you are falling in love with my Zina,” she
cried, feeling that the moment was a solemn one.

The prince’s reply surpassed her fondest expectations.

“I am madly in love with her!” cried the old man, all animated, of a
sudden. He was still on his knees, and he trembled with excitement as he
spoke. “I am ready to give my life for her! And if only I could hope, if
only I might have a little hope—I,—but, lift me up; I feel so weak. I—if
only she would give me the hope that I might offer her my heart, I—she
should sing ballads to me every day; and I could look at her, and look and
gaze and gaze at her.——Oh, my God! my God!”

“Prince, Prince! you are offering her your hand. You want to take her from
me, my Zina! my darling, my _ange_, my own dear child, Zina! No, Zina, no,
I can’t let you go! They must tear you from me, Zina. They must tear you
first from your mother’s arms!”

Maria Alexandrovna sprang to her daughter, and caught her up in a close
embrace, conscious, withal, of serious physical resistance on Zina’s part.
The fond mother was a little overdoing it.

Zina felt this with all her soul, and she looked on at the whole comedy
with inexpressible loathing.

However, she held her tongue, and that was all the fond mother required of
her.

“She has refused nine men because she will not leave me!” said Maria. “But
this time, I fear—my heart tells me that we are doomed to part! I noticed
just now how she looked at you, Prince. You have impressed her with your
aristocratic manner, with your refinement. Oh! Prince, you are going to
separate us—I feel it, I feel it!”

“I ad—ore her!” murmured the poor old man, still trembling like an
autumnal leaf.

“And you’ll consent to leave your mother!” cried Maria Alexandrovna,
throwing herself upon her daughter once more. Zina made haste to bring
this, to her, painful scene to an end. She stretched her pretty hand
silently to the prince, and even forced herself to smile. The prince
reverently took the little hand into his own, and covered it with kisses.

“I am only this mo—ment beginning to live,” he mutterred, in a voice that
seemed choking with rapture and ecstasy.

“Zina,” began Maria Alexandrovna, solemnly, “look well at this man! This
is the most honest and upright and noble man of all the men I know. He is
a knight of the middle ages! But she knows it, Prince, she knows it too
well; to my grief I say it. Oh! why did you come here? I am surrendering
my treasure to you—my angel! Oh! take care of her, Prince. Her mother
entreats you to watch over her. And what mother could blame my grief!”

“Enough, mamma! that’s enough,” said Zina, quietly.

“Protect her from all hurt and insult, Prince! Can I rely upon your sword
to flash in the face of the vile scandal-monger who dares to offend my
Zina?”

“Enough, mother, I tell you! am I——?”

“Ye—yes, ye—yes, it shall flash all right,” said the prince. “But I want
to be married now, at once. I—I’m only just learning what it is to live. I
want to send off to Donchanovo at once. I want to send for some di—iamonds
I have there. I want to lay them at her feet.——I——”

“What noble ardour! what ecstasy of love! what noble, generous feelings
you have, Prince!” cried Maria Alexandrovna. “And you could bury
yourself—_bury_ yourself, far from the world and society! I shall remind
you of this a thousand times! I go mad when I think of that _hellish_
woman.”

“What could I do? I was fri—ghtened!” stammered the prince in a whining
voice: “they wanted to put me in a lu—unatic asylum! I was dreadfully
alarmed!”

“In a lunatic asylum? Ah, the scoundrels! oh, the inhuman wretches! Ah,
the low cunning of them! Yes, Prince; I had heard of it. But the lunacy
was in these people, not in _you_. Why, _why_ was it—what for?”

“I don’t know myself, what it was for,” replied the poor old man, feebly
sinking into his chair; “I was at a ball, don’t you know, and told some
an—ecdote or other and they didn’t like it; and so they got up a scandal
and a ro—ow.”

“Surely that was not all, Prince?”

“No;—the—I was playing cards with Prince Paul De—mentieff, and I was
cleared out: you see, I had two kings and three quee—ns, three kings and
two qu—eens; or I should say—one king—and some queens—I know I had——.”

“And it was for this? Oh, the hellish inhumanity of some people! You are
weeping, Prince; but be of good cheer—it is all over now! Now I shall be
at hand, dearest Prince,—I shall not leave Zina; and we shall see which of
them will dare to say a word to you, _then_! And do you know, my Prince,
your marriage will expose them! it will shame them! They will see that you
are a man—that a lovely girl like our Zina would never have married a
madman! You shall raise your head proudly now, and look them straight in
the face!”

“Ye—yes; I shall look them straight in the f—ace!” murmured the prince,
slowly shutting his eyes.

Maria Alexandrovna saw that her work was done: the prince was tired out
with love and emotion. She was only wasting her eloquence!

“Prince, you are disturbed and tired, I see you are!” she said; “you must
rest, you must take a good rest after so much agitation,” she added,
bending over him maternally.

“Ye—yes, ye—yes; I should like to lie down a little,” said the old man.

“Of course, of course! you must lie down! those agitating scenes——stop, I
will escort you myself, and arrange your couch with my own hands! Why are
you looking so hard at that portrait, Prince? That is my mother’s picture;
she was an angel—not a woman! Oh, why is she not among us at this joyful
moment!”

“Ye—yes; charming—charming! Do you know, I had a mother too,—a princess,
and imagine! a re—markably, a re—markably fat woman she was; but that is
not what I was going to say,——I—I feel a little weak, and——Au revoir, my
charming child—to-morrow—to-day—I will—I—I—Au revoir, au revoir!” Here the
poor old fellow tried to kiss his hand, but slipped, and nearly fell over
the threshold of the door.

“Take care, dear Prince—take care! lean on my arm!” cried Maria
Alexandrovna.

“Charming, ch—arming!” he muttered, as he left the room. “I am only now
le—learning to live!”

Zina was left alone.

A terrible oppression weighed down her heart. She felt a sensation of
loathing which nearly suffocated her. She despised herself—her cheeks
burned. With folded hands, and teeth biting hard into her lips, she stood
in one spot, motionless. The tears of shame streamed from her eyes,——and
at this moment the door opened, and Paul Mosgliakoff entered the room!





CHAPTER IX.


He had heard all—_all_.

He did not actually enter the room, but stood at the door, pale with
excitement and fury. Zina looked at him in amazement.

“So that’s the sort of person you are!” he cried panting. “At last I have
found you out, have I?”

“Found me out?” repeated Zina, looking at him as though he were a madman.
Suddenly her eyes flashed with rage. “How dare you address me like that?”
she cried, advancing towards him.

“I have heard all!” said Mosgliakoff solemnly, but involuntarily taking a
step backwards.

“You heard? I see—you have been eavesdropping!” cried Zina, looking at him
with disdain.

“Yes, I have been eavesdropping! Yes—I consented to do a mean action, and
my reward is that I have found out that you, too, are——I don’t know how to
express to you what I think you!” he replied, looking more and more timid
under Zina’s eyes.

“And supposing that you _have_ heard all: what right have you to blame me?
What right have you to speak to me so insolently, in any case?”

“_I!_—_I?_ what right have _I_? and _you_ can ask me this? You are going
to marry this prince, and I have no right to say a word! Why, you gave me
your promise—is that nothing?”

“When?”

“How, when?”

“Did not I tell you that morning, when you came to me with your
sentimental nonsense—did I not tell you that I could give you no decided
answer?”

“But you did not reject me; you did not send me away. I see—you kept me
hanging in reserve, in case of need! You lured me into your net! I see, I
see it all!”

An expression of pain flitted over Zina’s careworn face, as though someone
had suddenly stabbed her to the heart; but she mastered her feelings.

“If I didn’t turn you out of the house,” she began deliberately and very
clearly, though her voice had a scarcely perceptible tremor in it, “I
refrained from such a course purely out of pity. You begged me yourself to
postpone, to give you time, not to say you ‘No,’ to study you better, and
‘then,’ you said, ‘then, when you know what a fine fellow I am, perhaps
you will not refuse me!’ These were your own words, or very like them, at
the very beginning of your courtship!—you cannot deny them! And now you
dare to tell me that I ‘lured you into my net,’ just as though you did not
notice my expression of loathing when you made your appearance this
morning! You came a fortnight sooner than I expected you, and I did not
hide my disgust; on the contrary, I made it evident—you must have noticed
it—I know you did; because you asked me whether I was angry because you
had come sooner than you promised! Let me tell you that people who do not,
and do not _care_ to, hide their loathing for a man can hardly be accused
of luring that man into their net! You dare to tell me that I was keeping
you in reserve! Very well; my answer to that is, that I judged of you like
this: ‘Though he may not be endowed with much intellect, still he may turn
out to be a good enough fellow; and if so, it might be possible to marry
him.’ However, being persuaded, now, that you are a fool, and a
_mischievous_ fool into the bargain,—having found out this fact, to my
great joy,—it only remains for me now to wish you every happiness and a
pleasant journey. Good-bye!”

With these words Zina turned her back on him, and deliberately made for
the door.

Mosgliakoff, seeing that all was lost, boiled over with fury.

“Oh! so I’m a fool!” he yelled; “I’m a fool, am I? Very well, good-bye!
But before I go, the whole town shall know of this! They shall all hear
how you and your mother made the old man drunk, and then swindled him! I
shall let the whole world know it! You shall see what Mosgliakoff can do!”

Zina trembled and stopped, as though to answer; but on reflection, she
contented herself by shrugging her shoulders; glanced contemptuously at
Mosgliakoff, and left the room, banging the door after her.

At this moment Maria Alexandrovna made her appearance. She heard
Mosgliakoff’s exclamation, and, divining at once what had happened,
trembled with terror. Mosgliakoff still in the house, and near the prince!
Mosgliakoff about to spread the news all over the town! At this moment,
when secrecy, if only for a short time, was essential! But Maria
Alexandrovna was quick at calculations: she thought, with an eagle flight
of the mind, over all the circumstances of the case, and her plan for the
pacification of Mosgliakoff was ready in an instant!

“What is it, _mon ami_?” she said, entering the room, and holding out her
hand to him with friendly warmth.

“How—‘_mon ami_?’ ” cried the enraged Mosgliakoff. “_Mon ami_, indeed! the
moment after you have abused and reviled me like a pickpocket! No, no! Not
quite so green, my good lady! I’m not to be so easily imposed upon again!”

“I am sorry, extremely sorry, to see you in such a _strange_ condition of
mind, Paul Alexandrovitch! What expressions you use! You do not take the
trouble to choose your words before ladies—oh, fie!”

“Before ladies? Ho ho! You—you are—you are anything you like—but not a
lady!” yelled Mosgliakoff.

I don’t quite know what he meant, but it was something very terrible, you
may be sure!

Maria Alexandrovna looked benignly in his face:

“Sit down!” she said, sorrowfully, showing him a chair, the same that the
old prince had reclined in a quarter of an hour before.

“But listen, _will_ you listen, Maria Alexandrovna? You look at me just as
though you were not the least to blame; in fact, as though _I_ were the
guilty party! Really, Maria Alexandrovna, this is a little _too_ much of a
good thing! No human being can stand that sort of thing, Maria
Alexandrovna! You must be aware of that fact!”

“My dear friend,” replied Maria Alexandrovna—“you will allow me to
continue to call you by that name, for you have no better friend than I
am!—my friend, you are suffering—you are amazed and bewildered; your heart
is sore, and therefore the tone of your remarks to me is perhaps not
surprising. But I have made up my mind to open my heart to you, especially
as I am, perhaps, in some degree to blame before you. Sit down; let us
talk it over!”

Maria Alexandrovna’s voice was tender to a sickly extent. Her face showed
the pain she was suffering. The amazed Mosgliakoff sat down beside her in
the arm-chair.

“You hid somewhere, and listened, I suppose?” she began, looking
reproachfully into his face.

“Yes I did, of course I did; and a good thing too! What a fool I should
have looked if I hadn’t! At all events now I know what you have been
plotting against me!” replied the injured man, rudely; encouraging and
supporting himself by his own fury.

“And you—and you—with your principles, and with your bringing up, could
condescend to such an action—Oh, oh!”

Mosgliakoff jumped up.

“Maria Alexandrovna, this is a little too much!” he cried. “Consider what
_you_ condescend to do, with _your_ principles, and _then_ judge of other
people.”

“One more question,” she continued, without replying to his outburst: “who
recommended you to be an eavesdropper; who told you anything; who is the
spy here? That’s what I wish to know!”

“Oh, excuse me; that I shall _not_ tell you!”

“Very well; I know already. I said, Paul, that I was in some degree to
blame before you. But if you look into the matter you will find that if I
am to blame it is solely in consequence of my anxiety to do you a good
turn!”

“_What?_ a good turn—_me_? No, no, madam! I assure you I am not to be
caught again! I’m not quite such a fool!”

He moved so violently in his arm-chair that it shook again.

“Now, do be cool, if you can, my good friend. Listen to me attentively,
and you will find that what I say is only the bare truth. In the first
place I was anxious to inform you of all that has just taken place, in
which case you would have learned everything, down to the smallest detail,
without being obliged to descend to eavesdropping! If I did not tell you
all before, it was simply because the whole matter was in an embryo
condition in my mind. It was then quite possible that what _has_ happened
would never happen. You see, I am quite open with you.

“In the second place, do not blame my daughter. She loves you to
distraction; and it was only by the exercise of my utmost influence that I
persuaded her to drop you, and accept the prince’s offer.”

“I have just had the pleasure of receiving convincing proof of her ‘love
to distraction!’ ” remarked Mosgliakoff, ironically and bitterly.

“Very well. But how did you speak to _her_? As a lover should speak?
Again, ought _any_ man of respectable position and tone to speak like
that? You insulted and wounded her!”

“Never mind about my ‘tone’ now! All I can say is that this morning, when
I went away with the prince, in spite of both of you having been as sweet
as honey to me before, you reviled me behind my back like a pickpocket!
_I_ know all about it, you see!”

“Yes, from the same dirty source, I suppose?” said Maria Alexandrovna,
smiling disdainfully. “Yes, Paul, I _did_ revile you: I pitched into you
considerably, and I admit it frankly. But it was simply that I was _bound_
to blacken you before her. Why? Because, as I have said, I required her to
consent to leave you, and this consent was so difficult to tear from her!
Short-sighted man that you are! If she had not loved you, why should I
have required so to blacken your character? Why should I have been obliged
to take this extreme step? Oh! you don’t know all! I was forced to use my
fullest maternal authority in order to erase you from her heart; and with
all my influence and skill I only succeeded in erasing your dear image
superficially and partially! If you saw and heard all just now, it cannot
have escaped you that Zina did not once, by either word or gesture,
encourage or confirm my words to the prince? Throughout the whole scene
she said not one word. She sang, but like an automaton! Her whole soul was
in anguish, and at last, out of pity for her, I took the prince away. I am
sure, she cried, when I left her alone! When you entered the room you must
have observed tears in her eyes?”

Mosgliakoff certainly did recall the fact that when he rushed into the
room Zina was crying.

“But you—_you_—why were _you_ so against me, Maria Alexandrovna?” he
cried. “Why did you revile me and malign me, as you admit you did?”

“Ah, now that’s quite a different question. Now, if you had only asked me
reasonably at the beginning, you should have had your answer long ago!
Yes, you are right. It was I, and I alone, who did it all. Do not think of
Zina in the matter. Now, _why_ did I do it? I reply, in the first place,
for Zina’s sake. The prince is rich, influential, has great connections,
and in marrying him Zina will make a brilliant match. Very well; then if
the prince dies—as perhaps he will die soon, for we are all mortal,—Zina
is still young, a widow, a princess, and probably very rich. Then she can
marry whom she pleases; she may make another brilliant match if she likes.
But of course she will marry the man she loves, and loved before, the man
whose heart she wounded by accepting the prince. Remorse alone would be
enough to make her marry the man whom she had loved and so deeply
injured!”

“Hem!” said Paul, gazing at his boots thoughtfully.

“In the second place,” continued Maria, “and I will put this shortly,
because, though you read a great deal of your beloved Shakespeare, and
extract his finest thoughts and ideals, yet you are very young, and
cannot, perhaps, apply what you read. You may not understand my feelings
in this matter: listen, however. _I_ am giving my Zina to this prince
partly for the prince’s own sake, because I wish to save him by this
marriage. We are old friends; he is the dearest and best of men, he is a
knightly, chivalrous gentleman, and he lives helpless and miserable in the
claws of that devil of a woman at Donchanovo! Heaven knows that I
persuaded Zina into this marriage by putting it to her that she would be
performing a great and noble action. I represented her as being the stay
and the comfort and the darling and the idol of a poor old man, who
probably would not live another year at the most! I showed her that thus
his last days should be made happy with love and light and friendship,
instead of wretched with fear and the society of a detestable woman. Oh!
do not blame Zina. She is guiltless. I am not—I admit it; for if there
have been calculations it is I who have made them! But I calculated for
her, Paul; for her, not myself! I have outlived my time; I have thought
but for my child, and what mother could blame me for this?” Tears sparkled
in the fond mother’s eyes. Mosgliakoff listened in amazement to all this
eloquence, winking his eyes in bewilderment.

“Yes, yes, of course! You talk well, Maria Alexandrovna, but you
forget—you gave me your word, you encouraged me, you gave me my hopes; and
where am I now? I have to stand aside and look a fool!”

“But, my dear Paul, you don’t surely suppose that I have not thought of
you too! Don’t you see the huge, immeasurable gain to yourself in all
this? A gain so vast that I was bound in your interest to act as I did!”

“Gain for me! How so?” asked Paul, in the most abject state of confusion
and bewilderment.

“Gracious Heavens! do you mean to say you are really so simple and so
short-sighted as to be unable to see _that_?” cried Maria Alexandrovna,
raising her eyes to the ceiling in a pious manner. “Oh! youth, youth!
That’s what comes of steeping one’s soul in Shakespeare! You ask me, my
dear friend Paul, where is the gain to you in all this. Allow me to make a
little digression. Zina loves you—that is an undoubted fact. But I have
observed that at the same time, and in spite of her evident love, she is
not quite sure of your good feeling and devotion to her; and for this
reason she is sometimes cold and self-restrained in your presence. Have
you never observed this yourself, Paul?”

“Certainly; I did this very day; but go on, what do you deduce from that
fact?”

“There, you see! you have observed it yourself; then of course I am right.
She is not quite sure of the _lasting_ quality of your feeling for her! I
am a mother, and I may be permitted to read the heart of my child. Now,
then, supposing that instead of rushing into the room and reproaching,
vilifying, even _swearing_ at and insulting this sweet, pure, beautiful,
proud being, instead of hurling contempt and vituperation at her
head—supposing that instead of all this you had received the bad news with
composure, with tears of grief, maybe; perhaps even with despair—but at
the same time with noble composure of soul——”

“H’m!”

“No, no—don’t interrupt me! I wish to show you the picture as it is. Very
well, supposing, then, that you had come to her and said, ‘Zina, I love
you better than my life, but family considerations must separate us; I
understand these considerations—they are devised for your greater
happiness, and I dare not oppose them. Zina, I forgive you; be happy, if
you can!’—think what effect such noble words would have wrought upon her
heart!”

“Yes—yes, that’s all very true, I quite understand that much! but if I
_had_ said all this, I should have had to go all the same, without
satisfaction!”

“No, no, no! don’t interrupt me! I wish to show you the _whole_ picture in
all its detail, in order to impress you fully and satisfactorily. Very
well, then, imagine now that you meet her in society some time afterwards:
you meet perhaps at a ball—in the brilliant light of a ball-room, under
the soothing strains of music, and in the midst of worldly women and of
all that is gay and beautiful. You alone are sad—thoughtful—pale,—you lean
against some pillar (where you are visible, however!) and watch her. She
is dancing. You hear the strains of Strauss, and the wit and merriment
around you, but you are sad and wretched.

“What, think you, will Zina make of it? With what sort of eyes will she
gaze on you as you stand there? ‘And I could doubt this man!’ she will
think, ‘this man who sacrificed all, all, for my sake—even to the mortal
wounding of his heart!’ Of course the old love will awake in her bosom and
will swell with irresistible power!”

Maria Alexandrovna stopped to take breath. Paul moved violently from side
to side of his chair.

“Zina now goes abroad for the benefit of the prince’s health—to Italy—to
Spain,” she continued, “where the myrtle and the lemon tree grow, where
the sky is so blue, the beautiful Guadalquiver flows! to the land of love,
where none can live without loving; where roses and kisses—so to
speak—breathe in the very air around. You follow her—you sacrifice your
business, friends, everything, and follow her. And so your love grows and
increases with irresistible might. Of course that love is
irreproachable—innocent—you will languish for one another—you will meet
frequently; of course others will malign and vilify you both, and call
your love by baser names—but your love is innocent, as I have purposely
said; I am her mother—it is not for me to teach you evil, but good. At all
events the prince is not in the condition to keep a very sharp look-out
upon you; but if he did, as if there would be the slightest ground for
base suspicion? Well, the prince dies at last, and then, who will marry
Zina, if not yourself? You are so distant a relative of the prince’s that
there could be no obstacle to the match; you marry her—she is young still,
and rich. You are a grandee in an instant! you, too, are rich now! I will
take care that the prince’s will is made as it should be; and lastly,
Zina, now convinced of your loyalty and faithfulness, will look on you
hereafter as her hero, as her paragon of virtue and self-sacrifice! Oh!
you must be blind,—_blind_, not to observe and calculate your own profit
when it lies but a couple of strides from you, grinning at you, as it
were, and saying, ‘Here, I am yours, take me! Oh, Paul, Paul!’ ”

“Maria Alexandrovna!” cried Mosgliakoff, in great agitation and
excitement, “I see it all! I have been rude, and a fool, and a scoundrel
too!” He jumped up from his chair and tore his hair.

“Yes, and unbusinesslike, that’s the chief thing—unbusinesslike, and
blindly so!” added Maria Alexandrovna.

“I’m an ass! Maria Alexandrovna,” he cried in despair. “All is lost now,
and I loved her to madness!”

“Maybe all is not lost yet!” said this successful orator softly, and as
though thinking out some idea.

“Oh! if only it could be so! help me—teach me. Oh! save me, save me!”

Mosgliakoff burst into tears.

“My dear boy,” said Maria Alexandrovna, sympathetically, and holding out
her hand, “you acted impulsively, from the depth and heat of your
passion—in fact, out of your great love for her; you were in despair, you
had forgotten yourself; she must understand all that!”

“Oh! I love her madly! I am ready to sacrifice everything for her!” cried
Mosgliakoff.

“Listen! I will justify you before her.”

“Oh, Maria Alexandrovna!”

“Yes, I will. I take it upon myself! You come with me, and you shall tell
her exactly what I said!”

“Oh, how kind, how good you are! Can’t we go at once, Maria Alexandrovna?”

“Goodness gracious, no! What a very green hand you are, Paul! She’s far
too proud! she would take it as a new rudeness and impertinence! To-morrow
I shall arrange it all comfortably for you: but now, couldn’t you get out
of the way somewhere for a while, to that godfather of yours, for
instance? You could come back in the evening, if you pleased; but my
advice would be to stay away!”

“Yes, yes! I’ll go—of course! Good heavens, you’ve made a man of me
again!—Well, but look here—one more question:—What if the prince does
_not_ die so soon?”

“Oh, my dear boy, how delightfully naïve you are! On the contrary, we must
pray for his good health! We must wish with all our hearts for long life
to this dear, good, and chivalrous old man! I shall be the first to pray
day and night for the happiness of my beloved daughter! But alas! I fear
the prince’s case is hopeless; you see, they must visit the capital now,
to bring Zina out into society.—I dreadfully fear that all this may prove
fatal to him; however, we’ll pray, Paul, we can’t do more, and the rest is
in the hands of a kind Providence. You see what I mean? Very
well—good-bye, my dear boy, bless you! Be a man, and wait patiently—be a
man, that’s the chief thing! I never doubted your generosity of character;
but be brave—good-bye!” She pressed his hand warmly, and Mosgliakoff
walked out of the room on tip-toes.

“There goes _one_ fool, got rid of satisfactorily!” observed Maria
Alexandrovna to herself,—“but there are more behind——!”

At this moment the door opened, and Zina entered the room. She was paler
than usual, and her eyes were all ablaze.

“Mamma!” she said, “be quick about this business, or I shall not be able
to hold out. It is all so dirty and mean that I feel I must run out of the
house if it goes on. Don’t drive me to desperation! I warn you—don’t weary
me out—don’t weary me out!”

“Zina—what is it, my darling? You—you’ve been listening?” cried Maria
Alexandrovna, gazing intently and anxiously at her daughter.

“Yes, I have; but you need not try to make me ashamed of myself as you
succeeded in doing with that fool. Now listen: I solemnly swear that if
you worry and annoy me by making me play various mean and odious parts in
this comedy of yours,—I swear to you that I will throw up the whole
business and put an end to it in a moment. It is quite enough that I have
consented to be a party in the main and essence of the base transactions;
but—but—I did not know myself, I am poisoned and suffocated with the
stench of it!”—So saying, she left the room and banged the door after her.

Maria Alexandrovna looked fixedly after her for a moment, and reflected.

“I must make haste,” she cried, rousing herself; “_she_ is the greatest
danger and difficulty of all! If these detestable people do not let us
alone, instead of acting the town-criers all over the place (as I fear
they are doing already!)—all will be lost! She won’t stand the worry of
it—she’ll drop the business altogether!—At all hazards, I must get the
prince to the country house, and that quickly, too! I shall be off there
at once, first, and bring my fool of a husband up: he shall be made useful
for once in his life! Meanwhile the prince shall have his sleep out, and
when he wakes up I shall be back and ready to cart him away bodily!”

She rang the bell.

“Are the horses ready?” she inquired of the man.

“Yes, madam, long ago!” said the latter.

She had ordered the carriage the moment after she had taken the prince
upstairs.

Maria Alexandrovna dressed hurriedly, and then looked in at Zina’s room
for a moment, before starting, in order to tell her the outlines of her
plan of operations, and at the same time to give Zina a few necessary
instructions. But her daughter could not listen to her. She was lying on
her bed with face hidden in the pillows, crying, and was tearing her
beautiful hair with her long white hands: occasionally she trembled
violently for a moment, as though a blast of cold had passed through all
her veins. Her mother began to speak to her, but Zina did not even raise
her head!

Having stood over her daughter in a state of bewilderment for some little
while, Maria Alexandrovna left the room; and to make up for lost time bade
the coachman drive like fury, as she stepped into the carriage.

“I don’t quite like Zina having listened!” she thought as she rattled
away. “I gave Mosgliakoff very much the same argument as to herself: she
is proud, and may easily have taken offence! H’m! Well, the great thing is
to be in time with all the arrangements,—before people know what I am up
to! Good heavens, fancy, if my fool of a husband were to be out!!”

And at the very thought of such a thing, Maria Alexandrovna’s rage so
overcame her that it was clear her poor husband would fare badly for his
sins if he proved to be not at home! She twisted and turned in her place
with impatience,—the horses almost galloped with the carriage at their
heels.





CHAPTER X.


On they flew.

I have said already that this very day, on her first drive after the
prince, Maria Alexandrovna had been inspired with a great idea! and I
promised to reveal this idea in its proper place. But I am sure the reader
has guessed it already!—It was, to “confiscate” the prince in her turn,
and carry him off to the village where, at this moment, her husband
Afanassy Matveyevitch vegetated alone.

I must admit that our heroine was growing more and more anxious as the day
went on; but this is often the case with heroes of all kinds, just before
they attain their great ends! Some such instinct whispered to her that it
was not safe to remain in Mordasoff another hour, if it could be
avoided;—but once in the country house, the whole town might go mad and
stand on its head, for all she cared!

Of course she must not lose time, even there! All sorts of things might
happen—even the police might interfere. (Reader, I shall never believe,
for my part, that my heroine really had the slightest fear of the vulgar
police force; but as it has been rumoured in Mordasoff that at this moment
such a thought _did_ pass through her brain, why, I must record the fact.)

In a word she saw clearly that Zina’s marriage with the prince must be
brought about at once, without delay! It was easily done: the priest at
the village should perform the ceremony; why not the day after to-morrow?
or indeed, in case of need, to-morrow? Marriages had often been brought
about in less time than this—in two hours, she had heard! It would be easy
enough to persuade the prince that haste and simplicity would be in far
better taste than all the usual pomps and vanities of common everyday
weddings. In fact, she relied upon her skill in putting the matter to the
old man as a fitting dramatic issue to a romantic story of love, and thus
to touch the most sensitive string of his chivalrous heart.

In case of absolute need there was always the possibility of making him
drunk, or rather of _keeping_ him perpetually drunk. And then, come what
might, Zina would be a princess! And if this marriage were fated to
produce scandal among the prince’s relations and friends in St. Petersburg
and Moscow, Maria Alexandrovna comforted herself with the reflection that
marriages in high life nearly always _were_ productive of scandal; and
that such a result might fairly be looked upon as “good form,” and as
peculiar to aristocratic circles.

Besides, she felt sure that Zina need only show herself in society, with
her mamma to support her, and every one of all those countesses and
princes should very soon either acknowledge her of their own accord, or
yield to the head-washing that Maria Alexandrovna felt herself so
competent to give to any or all of them, individually or collectively.

It was in consequence of these reflections that Maria Alexandrovna was now
hastening with all speed towards her village, in order to bring back
Afanassy Matveyevitch, whose presence she considered absolutely necessary
at this crisis. It was desirable that her husband should appear and invite
the prince down to the country: she relied upon the appearance of the
father of the family, in dress-coat and white tie, hastening up to town on
the first rumours of the prince’s arrival there, to produce a very
favourable impression upon the old man’s self-respect: it would flatter
him; and after such a courteous action, followed by a polite and
warmly-couched invitation to the country, the prince would hardly refuse
to go.

At last the carriage stopped at the door of a long low wooden house,
surrounded by old lime trees. This was the country house, Maria
Alexandrovna’s village residence.

Lights were burning inside.

“Where’s my old fool?” cried Maria Alexandrovna bursting like a hurricane
into the sitting-room.

“Whats this towel lying here for?—Oh!—he’s been wiping his head, has he.
What, the baths again! and tea—of course tea!—always tea! Well, what are
you winking your eyes at me for, you old fool?—Here, why is his hair not
cropped? Grisha, Grisha!—here; why didn’t you cut your master’s hair, as I
told you?”

Maria Alexandrovna, on entering the room, had intended to greet her
husband more kindly than this; but seeing that he had just been to the
baths and that he was drinking tea with great satisfaction, as usual, she
could not restrain her irritable feelings.

She felt the contrast between her own activity and intellectual energy,
and the stolid indifference and sheep-like contentedness of her husband,
and it went to her heart!

Meanwhile the “old fool,” or to put it more politely, he who had been
addressed by that title, sat at the tea-urn, and stared with open mouth,
in abject alarm, opening and shutting his lips as he gazed at the wife of
his bosom, who had almost petrified him by her sudden appearance.

At the door stood the sleepy, fat Grisha, looking on at the scene, and
blinking both eyes at periodical intervals.

“I couldn’t cut his hair as you wished, because he wouldn’t let me!” he
growled at last. “ ‘You’d better let me do it!’—I said, ‘or the
mistress’ll be down one of these days, and then we shall both catch it!’ ”

“No,” he says, “I want it like this now, and you shall cut it on Sunday. I
like it long!”

“What!—So you wish to curl it without my leave, do you! What an idea—as if
you could wear curls with your sheep-face underneath! Good gracious, what
a mess you’ve made of the place; and what’s the smell—what have you been
doing, idiot, eh!” cried Maria Alexandrovna, waxing more and more angry,
and turning furiously upon the wretched and perfectly innocent Afanassy!

“Mam—mammy!” muttered the poor frightened master of the house, gazing with
frightened eyes at the mistress, and blinking with all his might—“mammy!”

“How many times have I dinned into your stupid head that I am _not_ your
‘mammy.’ How can I be your mammy, you idiotic pigmy? How dare you call a
noble lady by such a name; a lady whose proper place is in the highest
circles, not beside an ass like yourself!”

“Yes—yes,—but—but, you _are_ my legal wife, you know, after all;—so I—it
was husbandly affection you know——” murmured poor Afanassy, raising both
hands to his head as he spoke, to defend his hair from the tugs he
evidently expected.

“Oh, idiot that you are! did anyone ever hear such a ridiculous answer as
that—legal wife, indeed! Who ever heard the expression ‘_legal_ wife,’ in
good society—nasty low expression! And how dare you remind me that I am
your wife, when I use all my power and do all I possibly can at every
moment to forget the fact, eh? What are you covering your head with your
hands for? Look at his hair—now: wet, as wet as reeds! it will take three
hours to dry that head! How on earth am I to take him like this? How can
he show his face among respectable people? What am I to do?”

And Maria Alexandrovna bit her finger-nails with rage as she walked
furiously up and down the room.

It was no very great matter, of course; and one that was easily set right;
but Maria Alexandrovna required a vent for her feelings and felt the need
of emptying out her accumulated wrath upon the head of the wretched
Afanassy Matveyevitch; for tyranny is a habit recallable at need.

Besides, everyone knows how great a contrast there is between the
sweetness and refinement shown by many ladies of a certain class on the
stage, as it were, of society life, and the revelations of character
behind the scenes at home; and I was anxious to bring out this contrast
for my reader’s benefit.

Afanassy watched the movements of his terrible spouse in fear and
trembling; perspiration formed upon his brow as he gazed.

“Grisha!” she cried at last, “dress your master this instant! Dress-coat,
black trousers, white waistcoat and tie, quick! Where’s his
hairbrush—quick, quick!”

“Mam—my! Why, I’ve just been to the bath. I shall catch cold if I go up to
town just now!”

“You won’t catch cold!”

“But—mammy, my hair’s quite wet!”

“We’ll dry it in a minute. Here, Grisha, take this brush and brush away
till he’s dry,—harder—harder—much harder! There, that’s better!”

Grisha worked like a man. For the greater convenience of his herculean
task he seized his master’s shoulder with one hand as he rubbed violently
with the other. Poor Afanassy grunted and groaned and almost wept.

“Now, then, lift him up a bit. Where’s the pomatum? Bend your head,
duffer!—bend lower, you abject dummy!” And Maria Alexandrovna herself
undertook to pomade her husband’s hair, ploughing her hands through it
without the slightest pity. Afanassy heartily wished that his shock growth
had been cut. He winced, and groaned and moaned, but did not cry out under
the painful operation.

“You suck my life-blood out of me—bend lower, you idiot!” remarked the
fond wife—“bend lower still, I tell you!”

“How have I sucked your life blood?” asked the victim, bending his head as
low as circumstances permitted.

“Fool!—allegorically, of course—can’t you understand? Now, then, comb it
yourself. Here, Grisha, dress him, quick!”

Our heroine threw herself into an arm-chair, and critically watched the
ceremony of adorning her husband. Meanwhile the latter had a little
opportunity to get his breath once more and compose his feelings
generally; so that when matters arrived at the point where the tie is
tied, he had even developed so much audacity as to express opinions of his
own as to how the bow should be manufactured.

At last, having put his dress-coat on, the lord of the manor was his brave
self again, and gazed at his highly ornate person in the glass with great
satisfaction and complacency.

“Where are you going to take me to?” he now asked, smiling at his
reflected self.

Maria Alexandrovna could not believe her ears.

“What—_what_? How _dare_ you ask me where I am taking you to, sir!”

“But—mammy—I must know, you know——”

“Hold your tongue! You let me hear you call me mammy again, especially
where we are going to now! you sha’n’t have any tea for a month!”

The frightened consort held his peace.

“Look at that, now! You haven’t got a single ’order’ to put on—sloven!”
she continued, looking at his black coat with contempt.

“The Government awards orders, mammy; and I am not a sloven, but a town
councillor!” said Afanassy, with a sudden excess of noble wrath.

“What, what—_what_! So you’ve learned to argue now, have you—you mongrel,
you? However, I haven’t time to waste over you now, or I’d——but I sha’n’t
forget it. Here, Grisha, give him his fur coat and his hat—quick; and look
here, Grisha, when I’m gone, get these three rooms ready, and the green
room, and the corner bedroom. Quick—find your broom; take the coverings
off the looking-glasses and clocks, and see that all is ready and tidy
within an hour. Put on a dress coat, and see that the other men have
gloves: don’t lose time. Quick, now!”

She entered the carriage, followed by Afanassy. The latter sat bewildered
and lost.

Meanwhile Maria Alexandrovna reflected as to how best she could drum into
her husband’s thick skull certain essential instructions with regard to
the present situation of affairs. But Afanassy anticipated her.

“I had a very original dream to-day, Maria Alexandrovna,” he observed
quite unexpectedly, in the middle of a long silence.

“Tfu! idiot. I thought you were going to say something of terrific
interest, from the look of you. Dream, indeed! How dare you mention your
miserable dreams to me! Original, too! Listen here: if you dare so much as
remind me of the word ‘dream,’ or say anything else, either, where we are
going to-day, I—I don’t know _what_ I won’t do to you! Now, look here:
Prince K. has arrived at my house. Do you remember Prince K.?”

“Oh, yes, mammy, I remember; and why has he done us this honour?”

“Be quiet; that’s not your business. Now, you are to invite him, with all
the amiability you can, to come down to our house in the country, at once!
That is what I am taking you up for. And if you dare so much as breathe
another word of any kind, either to-day or to-morrow, or next day, without
leave from me, you shall herd geese for a whole year. You’re not to say a
single word, mind! and that’s all you have to think of. Do you understand,
now?”

“Well, but if I’m asked anything?”

“Hold your tongue all the same!”

“Oh, but I can’t do that—I can’t do——”

“Very well, then; you can say ‘H’m,’ or something of that sort, to give
them the idea that you are very wise indeed, and like to think well before
answering.”

“H’m.”

“Understand me, now. I am taking you up because you are to make it appear
that you have just heard of the prince’s visit, and have hastened up to
town in a transport of joy to express your unbounded respect and gratitude
to him, and to invite him at once to your country house! Do you understand
me?”

“H’m.”

“I don’t want you to say ‘H’m’ _now_, you fool! You must answer _me_ when
I speak!”

“All right—all right, mammy. All shall be as you wish; but why am I to ask
the prince down?”

“What—what! arguing again. What business is it of yours _why_ you are to
invite him? How dare you ask questions!”

“Why it’s all the same thing, mammy. How am I to invite him if I must not
say a word?”

“Oh, I shall do all the talking. All you have to do is to bow. Do you
hear? _Bow_; and hold your hat in your hand and look polite. Do you
understand, or not?”

“I understand, mam—Maria-Alexandrovna.”

“The prince is very witty, indeed; so mind, if he says anything either to
yourself or anyone else, you are to laugh cordially and merrily. Do you
hear me?”

“H’m.”

“Don’t say ‘H’m’ to _me_, I tell you. You are to answer me plainly and
simply. Do you hear me, or not?”

“Yes, yes; I hear you, of course. That’s all right. I only say ‘H’m,’ for
practice; I want to get into the way of saying it. But look here, mammy,
it’s all very well; you say I’m not to speak, and if he speaks to me I’m
to look at him and laugh—but what if he asks me a question?”

“Oh—you dense log of a man! I tell you again, you are to be quiet. _I’ll_
answer for you. You have simply got to look polite, and smile!”

“But he’ll think I am dumb!” said Afanassy.

“Well, and what if he does. Let him! You’ll conceal the fact that you are
a fool, anyhow!”

“H’m, and if _other_ people ask me questions?”

“No one will; there’ll be no one to ask you. But if there _should_ be
anyone else in the room, and they ask you questions, all you have to do is
to smile sarcastically. Do you know what a sarcastic smile is?”

“What, a witty sort of smile, is it, mammy?”

“I’ll let you know about it! _Witty_, indeed! Why, who would think of
expecting anything witty from a fool like you. No, sir, a jesting
smile—_jesting_ and _contemptuous_!”

“H’m.”

“Good heavens. I’m afraid for this idiot,” thought Maria Alexandrovna to
herself. “I really think it would have been almost better to leave him
behind, after all.” So thinking, nervous and anxious, Maria Alexandrovna
drove on. She looked out of the window, and she fidgeted, and she bustled
the coachman up. The horses were almost flying through the air; but to her
they appeared to be crawling. Afanassy sat silent and thoughtful in the
corner of the carriage, practising his lessons. At last the carriage
arrived at the town house.

Hardly, however, had Maria Alexandrovna mounted the outer steps when she
became aware of a fine pair of horses trotting up—drawing a smart sledge
with a hood to it. In fact, the very “turn-out” in which Anna Nicolaevna
Antipova was generally to be seen.

Two ladies sat in the sledge. One of these was, of course, Mrs. Antipova
herself; the other was Natalia Dimitrievna, of late the great friend and
ally of the former lady.

Maria Alexandrovna’s heart sank.

But she had no time to say a word, before another smart vehicle drove up,
in which there reclined yet another guest. Exclamations of joy and delight
were now heard.

“Maria Alexandrovna! and Afanassy Matveyevitch! Just arrived, too! Where
from? How extremely delightful! And here we are, you see, just driven up
at the right moment. We are going to spend the evening with you. What a
delightful surprise.”

The guests alighted and fluttered up the steps like so many swallows.

Maria Alexandrovna could neither believe her eyes nor her ears.

“Curse you all!” she said to herself. “This looks like a plot—it must be
seen to; but it takes more than a flight of magpies like _you_ to get to
windward of _me_. Wait a little!!”





CHAPTER XI.


Mosgliakoff went out from Maria Alexandrovna’s house to all appearances
quite pacified. She had fired his ardour completely. His imagination was
kindled.

He did not go to his godfather’s, for he felt the need of solitude. A
terrific rush of heroic and romantic thoughts surged over him, and gave
him no rest.

He pictured to himself the solemn explanation he should have with Zina,
then the generous throbs of his all-forgiving heart; his pallor and
despair at the future ball in St. Petersburg; then Spain, the
Guadalquiver, and love, and the old dying prince joining their hands with
his last blessing. Then came thoughts of his beautiful wife, devoted to
himself, and never ceasing to wonder at and admire her husband’s heroism
and exalted refinement of taste and conduct. Then, among other things, the
attention which he should attract among the ladies of the highest circles,
into which he would of course enter, thanks to his marriage with
Zina—widow of the Prince K.: then the inevitable appointments, first as a
vice-governor, with the delightful accompaniment of salary: in a word,
all, _all_ that Maria Alexandrovna’s eloquence had pictured to his
imagination, now marched in triumphant procession through his brain,
soothing and attracting and flattering his self-love.

And yet—(I really cannot explain this phenomenon, however!)—and yet, no
sooner did the first flush of this delightful sunrise of future delights
pass off and fade away, than the annoying thought struck him: this is all
very well, but it is in the future: and now, to-day, I shall look a
dreadful fool. As he reflected thus, he looked up and found that he had
wandered a long way, to some of the dirty back slums of the town. A wet
snow was falling; now and again he met another belated pedestrian like
himself. The outer circumstances began to anger Mosgliakoff, which was a
bad sign; for when things are going well with us we are always inclined to
see everything in a rose-coloured light.

Paul could not help remembering that up to now he had been in the habit of
cutting a dash at Mordasoff. He had enjoyed being treated at all the
houses he went to in the town, as Zina’s accepted lover, and to be
congratulated, as he often was, upon the honour of that distinction. He
was proud of being her future husband; and here he was now with notice to
quit. He would be laughed at. He couldn’t tell everybody about the future
scene in the ball-room at St. Petersburg, and the Guadalquiver, and all
that! And then a thought came out into prominence, which had been
uncomfortably fidgeting about in his brain for some time: “Was it all
true? _Would_ it really come about as Maria Alexandrovna had predicted?”

Here it struck him that Maria Alexandrovna was an amazingly cunning woman;
that, however worthy she might be of universal esteem, still she was a
known scandal-monger, and lied from morning to night! that, again, she
probably had some good reason for wishing him out of the place to-night.
He next bethought him of Zina, and of her parting look at him, which was
very far from being expressive of passionate love; he remembered also,
that, less than an hour ago she had called him a fool.

As he thought of the last fact Paul stopped in his tracks, as though shot;
blushed, and almost cried for very shame! At this very moment he was
unfortunate enough to lose his footing on the slippery pavement, and to go
head-first into a snow-heap. As he stood shaking himself dry, a whole
troop of dogs, which had long trotted barking at his heels, flew at him.
One of them, a wretched little half-starved beast, went so far as to fix
her teeth into his fur coat and hang therefrom. Swearing and striking out,
Paul cleared his way out of the yelping pack at last, in a fury, and with
rent clothes; and making his way as fast as he could to the corner of the
street, discovered that he hadn’t the slightest idea where he was. He
walked up lanes, and down streets, and round corners, and lost himself
more and more hopelessly; also his temper. “The devil take all these
confounded exalted ideas!” he growled, half aloud; “and the archfiend take
every one of you, you and your Guadalquivers and humbug!”

Mosgliakoff was not in a pretty humour at this moment.

At last, tired and horribly angry, after two hours of walking, he reached
the door of Maria Alexandrovna’s house.

Observing a host of carriages standing outside, he paused to consider.

“Surely she has not a party to-night!” he thought, “and if she has, _why_
has she a party?”

He inquired of the servants, and found out that Maria Alexandrovna had
been out of town, and had fetched up Afanassy Matveyevitch, gorgeous in
his dress-suit and white tie. He learned, further, that the prince was
awake, but had not as yet made his appearance in the “salon.”

On receiving this information, Paul Mosgliakoff said not a word, but
quietly made his way upstairs to his uncle’s room.

He was in that frame of mind in which a man determines to commit some
desperate act, out of revenge, aware at the time, and wide awake to the
fact that he is about to do the deed, but forgetting entirely that he may
very likely regret it all his life afterwards!

Entering the prince’s room, he found that worthy seated before the glass,
with a perfectly bare head, but with whiskers and napoleon stuck on. His
wig was in the hands of his old and grey valet, his favourite Ivan
Pochomitch, and the latter was gravely and thoughtfully combing it out.

As for the prince, he was indeed a pitiable object! He was not half awake
yet, for one thing; he sat as though he were still dazed with sleep; he
kept opening and shutting his mouth, and stared at Mosgliakoff as though
he did not know him!

“Well, how are you, uncle?” asked Mosgliakoff.

“What, it’s you, is it!” said the prince. “Ye—yes; I’ve been as—leep a
little while! Oh, heavens!” he cried suddenly, with great animation, “why,
I’ve got no wi—ig on!”

“Oh, never mind that, uncle; I’ll help you on with it, if you like!”

“Dear me; now you’ve found out my se—ecret! I told him to shut the door.
Now, my friend, you must give me your word in—stantly, that you’ll never
breathe a hint of this to anyone—I mean about my hair being ar—tificial!”

“Oh, uncle! As if I could be guilty of such meanness?” cried Paul, who was
anxious to please the prince, for reasons of his own.

“Ye—yes, ye—yes. Well, as I see you are a good fe—ellow, I—I’ll just
as—tonish you a little: I’ll tell you all my secrets! How do you like my
mous—tache, my dear boy?”

“Wonderful, uncle, wonderful! It astonishes me that you should have been
able to keep it so long!”

“Sp—are your wonder, my friend, it’s ar—tificial!”

“No!! That’s difficult to believe! Well, and your whiskers, uncle!
admit—you black them, now _don’t_ you?”

“Black them? Not—only I don’t black them, but they, too, are ar—tificial!”
said the Prince, regarding Mosgliakoff with a look of triumph.

“_What!_ Artificial? No, no, uncle! I can’t believe _that_! You’re
laughing at me!”

“_Parole d’honneur, mon ami!_” cried the delighted old man; “and fancy,
all—everybody is taken in by them just as you were! Even Stepanida
Matveyevna cannot believe they are not real, sometimes, although she often
sticks them on herself! But, I am sure, my dear friend, you will keep my
se—cret. Give me your word!”

“I do give you my word, uncle! But surely you do not suppose I would be so
mean as to divulge it?”

“Oh, my boy! I had such a fall to-day, without you. The coachman upset me
out of the carriage again!”

“How? When?”

“Why, we were driving to the mo—nastery, when?——”

“I know, uncle: that was early this morning!”

“No, no! A couple of hours ago, not more! I was driving along with him,
and he suddenly took and up—set me!”

“Why, my dear uncle, you were asleep,” began Paul, in amazement!

“Ye—yes, ye—yes. I did have a sleep; and then I drove away, at least I—at
least I—dear me, how strange it all seems!”

“I assure you, uncle, you have been dreaming! You saw all this in a dream!
You have been sleeping quietly here since just after dinner!”

“No!” And the prince reflected. “Ye—yes. Perhaps I did see it all in a
dream! However, I can remember all I saw quite well. First, I saw a large
bull with horns; and then I saw a pro—curor, and I think he had huge horns
too. Then there was Napoleon Buonaparte. Did you ever hear, my boy, that
people say I am so like Napoleon Buonaparte? But my profile is very like
some old pope. What do you think about it, my bo—oy?”

“I think you are much more like Napoleon Buonaparte, uncle!”

“Why, ye—yes, of course—full face; so I am, my boy, so I am! I dreamt of
him on his is—land, and do you know he was such a merry, talk—ative
fellow, he quite am—used me!”

“Who, uncle—Napoleon?” asked Mosgliakoff, looking thoughtfully at the old
man. A strange idea was beginning to occupy his brain—an idea which he
could not quite put into shape as yet.

“Ye—yes, ye—yes, Nap—oleon. We talked about philosophical subjects. And do
you know, my boy, I became quite sorry that the English had been so hard
upon him. Of course, though, if one didn’t chain him up, he would be
flying at people’s throats again! Still I’m sorry for him. Now I should
have managed him quite differently. I should have put him on an
uninhabited island.”

“Why uninhabited, uncle?” asked Mosgliakoff, absently.

“Well, well, an inhabited one, then; but the in—habitants must be good
sort of people. And I should arrange all sorts of amusements for him, at
the State’s charge: theatres, balle’s, and so on. And, of course, he
should walk about, under proper su—pervision. Then he should have tarts
(he liked tarts, you know), as many tarts as ever he pleased. I should
treat him like a fa—ather; and he would end by being sorry for his sins,
see if he wouldn’t!”

Mosgliakoff listened absently to all this senile gabble, and bit his nails
with impatience. He was anxious to turn the conversation on to the subject
of marriage. He did not know quite clearly why he wished to do so, but his
heart was boiling over with anger.

Suddenly the old man made an exclamation of surprise.

“Why, my dear boy, I declare I’ve forgotten to tell you about it. Fancy, I
made an offer of marriage to-day!”

“An offer of marriage, uncle?” cried Paul, brightening up.

“Why, ye—yes! an offer. Pachomief, are you going? All right! Away with
you! Ye—yes, _c’est une charmante personne_. But I confess, I took the
step rather rash—ly. I only begin to see that now. Dear me! dear, dear
me!”

“Excuse me, uncle; but _when_ did you make this offer?”

“Well, I admit I don’t know exactly _when_ I made it! Perhaps I
dre—dreamed it; I don’t know. Dear me, how very strange it all seems!”

Mosgliakoff trembled with joy: his new idea blazed forth in full developed
glory.

“And _whom_ did you propose to?” he asked impatiently.

“The daughter of the house, my boy; that beau—tiful girl. I—I forget what
they call her. Bu—but, my dear boy, you see I—I can’t possibly marry. What
am I to do?”

“Oh! of course, you are done for if you marry, that’s clear. But let me
ask you one more question, uncle. Are you perfectly certain that you
actually made her an offer of marriage?”

“Ye—yes, I’m sure of it; I—I——.”

“And what if you dreamed the whole thing, just as you did that you were
upset out of the carriage a second time?”

“Dear me! dear me! I—I really think I may have dreamed it; it’s very
awkward. I don’t know how to show myself there, now. H—how could I find
out, dear boy, for certain? Couldn’t I get to know by some outside way
whether I really did make her an offer of ma—arriage or not? Why, just you
think of my dreadful po—sition!”

“Do you know, uncle, I don’t think we need trouble ourselves to find out
at all.”

“Why, wh—what then?”

“I am convinced that you were dreaming.”

“I—I think so myself, too, my dear fellow; es—pecially as I often have
that sort of dream.”

“You see, uncle, you had a drop of wine for lunch, and then another drop
or two for dinner, don’t you know; and so you may easily have——”

“Ye—yes, quite so, quite so; it may easily have been that.”

“Besides, my dear uncle, however excited you may have been, you would
never have taken such a senseless step in your waking moments. So far as I
know you, uncle, you are a man of the highest and most deliberate
judgment, and I am positive that——”

“Ye—yes, ye—yes.”

“Why, only imagine—if your relations were to get to hear of such a thing.
My goodness, uncle! they were cruel enough to you before. What do you
suppose they would do _now_, eh?”

“Goodness gracious!” cried the frightened old prince. “Good—ness gracious!
Wh—why, what would they do, do you think?”

“Do? Why, of course, they would all screech out that you had acted under
the influence of insanity: in fact, that you were mad; that you had been
swindled, and that you must be put under proper restraint. In fact, they’d
pop you into some lunatic asylum.”

Mosgliakoff was well aware of the best method of frightening the poor old
man out of his wits.

“Gracious heavens!” cried the latter, trembling like a leaflet with
horror. “Gra—cious heavens! would they really do that?”

“Undoubtedly; and, knowing this, uncle, think for yourself. Could you
possibly have done such a thing with your eyes open? As if you don’t
understand what’s good for you just as well as your neighbours. I solemnly
affirm that you saw all this in a dream!”

“Of course, of course; un—doubtedly in a dream, un—doubtedly so! What a
clever fellow you are, my dear boy; you saw it at once. I am deeply
grate—ful to you for putting me right. I was really quite under the
im—pression I had actually done it.”

“And how glad I am that I met you, uncle, before you went in there! Just
fancy, what a mess you might have made of it! You might have gone in
thinking you were engaged to the girl, and behaved in the capacity of
accepted lover. Think how fearfully dangerous——.”

“Ye—yes, of course; most dangerous!”

“Why, remember, this girl is twenty-three years old. Nobody will marry
her, and suddenly _you_, a rich and eminent man of rank and title, appear
on the scene as her accepted swain. They would lay hold of the idea at
once, and act up to it, and swear that you really were her future husband,
and would marry you off, too. I daresay they would even count upon your
speedy death, and make their calculations accordingly.”

“No!”

“Then again, uncle; a man of your dignity——”

“Ye—yes, quite so, dig—nity!”

“And wisdom,—and amiability——”

“Quite so; wis—dom—wisdom!”

“And then—a prince into the bargain! Good gracious, uncle, as if a man
like yourself would make such a match as _that_, if you really did mean
marrying! What would your relations say?”

“Why, my dear boy, they’d simply ea—eat me up,—I—I know their cunning and
malice of old! My dear fellow—you won’t believe it—but I assure you I was
afraid they were going to put me into a lun—atic asylum! a common
ma—ad-house! Goodness me, think of that! Whatever should I have done with
myself all day in a ma—ad-house?”

“Of course, of course! Well, I won’t leave your side, then, uncle, when
you go downstairs. There are guests there too!”

“Guests? dear me! I—I——”

“Don’t be afraid, uncle; I shall be by you!”

“I—I’m _so_ much obliged to you, my dear boy; you have simply sa—ved me,
you have indeed! But, do you know what,—I think I’d better go away
altogether!”

“To-morrow, uncle! to-morrow morning at seven! and this evening you must
be sure to say, in the presence of everybody, that you are starting away
at seven next morning: you must say good-bye to-night!”

“Un—doubtedly, undoubtedly—I shall go;—but what if they talk to me as
though I were engaged to the young wo—oman?”

“Don’t you fear, uncle! I shall be there! And mind, whatever they say or
hint to you, you must declare that you dreamed the whole thing—as indeed
you did, of course?”

“Ye—yes, quite so, un—doubtedly so! But, do you know my dear boy, it was a
most be—witching dream, for all that! She is a wond—erfully lovely girl,
my boy,—such a figure—bewitching—be—witching!”

“Well, _au revoir_, uncle! I’m going down, now, and you——”

“How! How! you are not going to leave me alone?” cried the old man,
greatly alarmed.

“No, no—oh no, uncle; but we must enter the room separately. First, I will
go in, and then you come down; that will be better!”

“Very well, very well. Besides, I just want to note down one little
i—dea——”

“Capital, uncle! jot it down, and then come at once; don’t wait any
longer; and to-morrow morning——”

“And to-morrow morning away we go to the Her—mitage, straight to the
Her—mitage! Charming—charm—ing! but, do you know, my boy,—she’s a
fas—cinating girl—she is indeed! be—witching! Such a bust! and, really, if
I were to marry, I—I—really——”

“No, no, uncle! Heaven forbid!”

“Yes—yes—quite so—Heaven for—bid!—well, _au revoir_, my friend—I’ll come
directly; by the bye—I meant to ask you, have you read Kazanoff’s
Memoirs?”

“Yes, uncle. Why?”

“Yes, yes, quite so—I forget what I wanted to say——”

“You’ll remember afterwards, uncle! _au revoir!_”

“_Au revoir_, my boy, _au revoir_—but, I say, it was a bewitching dream, a
most be—witching dream!”





CHAPTER XII.


“Here we all are, all of us, come to spend the evening; Proskovia
Ilinishna is coming too, and Luisa Karlovna and all!” cried Mrs. Antipova
as she entered the salon, and looked hungrily round. She was a neat,
pretty little woman! she was well-dressed, and knew it.

She looked greedily around, as I say, because she had an idea that the
prince and Zina were hidden together somewhere about the room.

“Yes, and Katerina Petrovna, and Felisata Michaelovna are coming as well,”
added Natalia Dimitrievna, a huge woman—whose figure had pleased the
prince so much, and who looked more like a grenadier than anything else.
This monster had been hand and glove with little Mrs. Antipova for the
last three weeks; they were now quite inseparable. Natalia looked as
though she could pick her little friend up and swallow her, bones and all,
without thinking.

“I need not say with what _rapture_ I welcome you both to my house, and
for a whole evening, too!” piped Maria Alexandrovna, a little recovered
from her first shock of amazement; “but do tell me, what miracle is it
that has brought you all to-day, when I had quite despaired of ever seeing
anyone of you in my house again?”

“Oh, oh! my _dear_ Maria Alexandrovna!” said Natalia, very affectedly, but
sweetly. The attributes of sweetness and affectation were a curious
contrast to her personal appearance.

“You see, dearest Maria Alexandrovna,” chirped Mrs. Antipova, “we really
must get on with the private theatricals question! It was only this very
day that Peter Michaelovitch was saying how _bad_ it was of us to have
made no progress towards rehearsing, and so on; and that it was quite time
we brought all our silly squabbles to an end! Well, four of us got
together to-day, and then it struck us ‘Let’s all go to Maria
Alexandrovna’s, and settle the matter once for all!’ So Natalia
Dimitrievna let all the rest know that we were to meet here! We’ll soon
settle it—I don’t think we should allow it to be said that we do nothing
but ‘squabble’ over the preliminaries and get no farther, do _you_, dear
Maria Alexandrovna?” She added, playfully, and kissing our heroine
affectionately, “Goodness me, Zenaida, I declare you grow prettier every
day!” And she betook herself to embracing Zina with equal affection.

“She has nothing else to do, but sit and grow more and more beautiful!”
said Natalia with great sweetness, rubbing her huge hands together.

“Oh, the devil take them all! they know I care nothing about private
theatricals—cursed magpies!” reflected Maria Alexandrovna, beside herself
with rage.

“Especially, dear, as that delightful prince is with you just now. You
know there is a private theatre in his house at Donchanof, and we have
discovered that somewhere or other there, there are a lot of old
theatrical properties and decorations and scenery. The prince was at my
house to-day, but I was so surprised to see him that it all went clean out
of my head and I forgot to ask him. Now we’ll broach the subject before
him. You must support me and we’ll persuade him to send us all the old
rubbish that can be found. We want to get the prince to come and see the
play, too! He is sure to subscribe, isn’t he—as it is for the poor?
Perhaps he would even take a part; he is such a dear, kind, willing old
man. If only he did, it would make the fortune of our play!”

“Of course he will take a part! why, he can be made to play _any_ part!”
remarked Natalia significantly.

Mrs. Antipova had not exaggerated. Guests poured in every moment! Maria
Alexandrovna hardly had time to receive one lot and make the usual
exclamations of surprise and delight exacted by the laws of etiquette
before another arrival would be announced.

I will not undertake to describe all these good people. I will only remark
that every one of them, on arrival, looked about her cunningly; and that
every face wore an expression of expectation and impatience.

Some of them came with the distinct intention of witnessing some scene of
a delightfully scandalous nature, and were prepared to be very angry
indeed if it should turn out that they were obliged to leave the house
without the gratification of their hopes.

All behaved in the most amiable and affectionate manner towards their
hostess; but Maria Alexandrovna firmly braced her nerves for battle.

Many apparently natural and innocent questions were asked about the
prince; but in each one might be detected some hint or insinuation.

Tea came in, and people moved about and changed places: one group
surrounded the piano; Zina was requested to play and sing, but answered
drily that she was not quite well—and the paleness of her face bore out
this assertion. Inquiries were made for Mosgliakoff; and these inquiries
were addressed to Zina.

Maria Alexandrovna proved that she had the eyes and ears of ten ordinary
mortals. She saw and heard all that was going on in every corner of the
room; she heard and answered every question asked, and answered readily
and cleverly. She was dreadfully anxious about Zina, however, and wondered
why she did not leave the room, as she usually did on such occasions.

Poor Afanassy came in for his share of notice, too. It was the custom of
these amiable people of Mordasoff to do their best to set Maria
Alexandrovna and her husband “by the ears;” but to-day there were hopes of
extracting valuable news and secrets out of the candid simplicity of the
latter.

Maria Alexandrovna watched the state of siege into which the wretched
Afanassy was thrown, with great anxiety; he was answering “H’m!” to all
questions put to him, as instructed; but with so wretched an expression
and so extremely artificial a mien that Maria Alexandrovna could barely
restrain her wrath.

“Maria Alexandrovna! your husband won’t have a word to say to me!”
remarked a sharp-faced little lady with a devil-may-care manner, as though
she cared nothing for anybody, and was not to be abashed under any
circumstances. “Do ask him to be a _little_ more courteous towards
ladies!”

“I really don’t know myself what can have happened to him to-day!” said
Maria Alexandrovna, interrupting her conversation with Mrs. Antipova and
Natalia, and laughing merrily; “he is so _dreadfully_ uncommunicative! He
has scarcely said a word even to _me_, all day! Why don’t you answer
Felisata Michaelovna, Afanassy? What did you ask him?”

“But, but—why, mammy, you told me yourself”—began the bewildered and lost
Afanassy. At this moment he was standing at the fireside with one hand
placed inside his waistcoat, in an artistic position which he had chosen
deliberately, on mature reflection,—and he was sipping his tea. The
questions of the ladies had so confused him that he was blushing like a
girl.

When he began the justification of himself recorded above, he suddenly met
so dreadful a look in the eyes of his infuriated spouse that he nearly
lost all consciousness, for terror!

Uncertain what to do, but anxious to recover himself and win back her
favour once more, he said nothing, but took a gulp of tea to restore his
scattered senses.

Unfortunately the tea was too hot; which fact, together with the hugeness
of the gulp he took—quite upset him. He burned his throat, choked, sent
the cup flying, and burst into such a fit of coughing that he was obliged
to leave the room for a time, awakening universal astonishment by his
conduct.

In a word, Maria Alexandrovna saw clearly enough that her guests knew all
about it, and had assembled with malicious intent! The situation was
dangerous! They were quite capable of confusing and overwhelming the
feeble-minded old prince before her very eyes! They might even carry him
off bodily—after stirring up a quarrel between the old man and herself!
_Anything_ might happen.

But fate had prepared her one more surprise. The door opened and in came
Mosgliakoff—who, as she thought, was far enough away at his godfather’s,
and would not come near her to-night! She shuddered as though something
had hurt her.

Mosgliakoff stood a moment at the door, looking around at the company. He
was a little bewildered, and could not conceal his agitation, which showed
itself very clearly in his expression.

“Why, it’s Paul Alexandrovitch! and you told us he had gone to his
godfather’s, Maria Alexandrovna. We were told you had hidden yourself away
from us, Paul Alexandrovitch!” cried Natalia.

“Hidden myself?” said Paul, with a crooked sort of a smile. “What a
strange expression! Excuse me, Natalia Dimitrievna, but I never hide from
anyone; I have no cause to do so, that I know of! Nor do I ever hide
anyone else!” he added, looking significantly at Maria Alexandrovna.

Maria Alexandrovna trembled in her shoes.

“Surely this fool of a man is not up to anything disagreeable!” she
thought. “No, no! that would be worse than anything!” She looked curiously
and anxiously into his eyes.

“Is it true, Paul Alexandrovitch, that you have just been politely
dismissed?—the Government service, I mean, of course!” remarked the daring
Felisata Michaelovna, looking impertinently into his eyes.

“Dismissed! How dismissed? I’m simply changing my department, that’s all!
I am to be placed at Petersburg!” Mosgliakoff answered, drily.

“Oh! well, I congratulate you!” continued the bold young woman. “We were
alarmed to hear that you were trying for a—a place down here at Mordasoff.
The berths here are wretched, Paul Alexandrovitch—no good at all, I assure
you!”

“I don’t know—there’s a place as teacher at the school, vacant, I
believe,” remarked Natalia.

This was such a crude and palpable insinuation that even Mrs. Antipova was
ashamed of her friend, and kicked her, under the table.

“You don’t suppose Paul Alexandrovitch would accept the place vacated by a
wretched little schoolmaster!” said Felisata Michaelovna.

But Paul did not answer. He turned at this moment, and encountered
Afanassy Matveyevitch, just returning into the room. The latter offered
him his hand. Mosgliakoff, like a fool, looked beyond poor Afanassy, and
did not take his outstretched hand: annoyed to the limits of endurance, he
stepped up to Zina, and muttered, gazing angrily into her eyes:

“This is all thanks to you! Wait a bit; you shall see this very day
whether I am a fool or not!”

“Why put off the revelation? It is clear enough already!” said Zina,
aloud, staring contemptuously at her former lover.

Mosgliakoff hurriedly left her. He did not half like the loud tone she
spoke in.

“Have you been to your godfather’s?” asked Maria Alexandrovna at last,
determined to sound matters in this direction.

“No, I’ve just been with uncle.”

“With your uncle! What! have you just come from the prince now?”

“Oh—oh! and we were told the prince was asleep!” added Natalia
Dimitrievna, looking daggers at Maria Alexandrovna.

“Do not be disturbed about the prince, Natalia Dimitrievna,” replied Paul,
“he is awake now, and quite restored to his senses. He was persuaded to
drink a good deal too much wine, first at your house, and then here; so
that he quite lost his head, which never was too strong. However, I have
had a talk with him, and he now seems to have entirely recovered his
judgment, thank God! He is coming down directly to take his leave, Maria
Alexandrovna, and to thank you for all your kind hospitality; and
to-morrow morning early we are off to the Hermitage. Thence I shall myself
see him safe home to Donchanovo, in order that he may be far from the
temptation to further excesses like that of to-day. There I shall give him
over into the hands of Stepanida Matveyevna, who must be back at home by
this time, and who will assuredly never allow him another opportunity of
going on his travels, I’ll answer for that!”

So saying, Mosgliakoff stared angrily at Maria Alexandrovna. The latter
sat still, apparently dumb with amazement. I regret to say—it gives me
great pain to record it—that, perhaps for the first time in her life, my
heroine was decidedly alarmed.

“So the prince is off to-morrow morning! Dear me; why is that?” inquired
Natalia Dimitrievna, very sweetly, of Maria Alexandrovna.

“Yes. How is that?” asked Mrs. Antipova, in astonishment.

“Yes; dear me! how comes that, I wonder!” said two or three voices. “How
can that be? When we were told—dear me! How very strange!”

But the mistress of the house could not find words to reply in.

However, at this moment the general attention was distracted by a most
unwonted and eccentric episode. In the next room was heard a strange
noise—sharp exclamations and hurrying feet, which was followed by the
sudden appearance of Sophia Petrovna, the fidgety guest who had called
upon Maria Alexandrovna in the morning.

Sophia Petrovna was a very eccentric woman indeed—so much so that even the
good people of Mordasoff could not support her, and had lately voted her
out of society. I must observe that every evening, punctually at seven,
this lady was in the habit of having, what she called, “a snack,” and that
after this snack, which she declared was for the benefit of her liver, her
condition was well _emancipated_, to use no stronger term. She was in this
very condition, as described, now, as she appeared flinging herself into
Maria Alexandrovna’s salon.

“Oho! so this is how you treat me, Maria Alexandrovna!” she shouted at the
top of her voice. “Oh! don’t be afraid, I shall not inflict myself upon
you for more than a minute! I won’t sit down. I just came in to see if
what they said was true! Ah! so you go in for balls and receptions and
parties, and Sophia Petrovna is to sit at home alone, and knit stockings,
is she? You ask the whole town in, and leave me out, do you? Yes, and I
was _mon ange_, and ‘dear,’ and all the rest of it when I came in to warn
you of Natalia Dimitrievna having got hold of the prince! And now this
very Natalia Dimitrievna, whom you swore at like a pickpocket, and who was
just about as polite when she spoke of you, is here among your guests? Oh,
don’t mind _me_, Natalia Dimitrievna, _I_ don’t want your _chocolat à la
santé_ at a penny the ounce, six cups to the ounce! thanks, I can do
better at home; t’fu, a good deal better.”

“Evidently!” observed Natalia Dimitrievna.

“But—goodness gracious, Sophia Petrovna!” cried the hostess, flushing with
annoyance; “what is it all about? Do show a little common sense!”

“Oh, don’t bother about me, Maria Alexandrovna, thank you! I know all
about it—oh, dear me, yes!—_I_ know all about it!” cried Sophia Petrovna,
in her shrill squeaky voice, from among the crowd of guests who now
surrounded her, and who seemed to derive immense satisfaction from this
unexpected scene. “Oh, yes, I know all about it, I assure you! Your friend
Nastasia came over and told me all! You got hold of the old prince, made
him drunk and persuaded him to make an offer of marriage to your daughter
Zina—whom nobody else will marry; and I daresay you suppose you are going
to be a very great lady, indeed—a sort of duchess in lace and jewellery.
Tfu! Don’t flatter yourself; you may not be aware that I, too, am a
colonel’s lady! and if you don’t care to ask me to your betrothal parties,
you needn’t: I scorn and despise you and your parties too! I’ve seen
honester women than you, you know! I have dined at Countess
Zalichvatsky’s; a chief commissioner proposed for my hand! A lot _I_ care
for your invitations. Tfu!”

“Look here, Sophia Petrovna,” said Maria Alexandrovna, beside herself with
rage; “I assure you that people do not indulge in this sort of sally at
respectable houses; especially in _the condition you are now in_! And let
me tell you that if you do not immediately relieve me of your presence and
eloquence, I shall be obliged to take the matter into my own hands!”

“Oh, I know—you’ll get your people to turn me out! Don’t trouble
yourself—I know the way out! Good-bye,—marry your daughter to whom you
please, for all I care. And as for _you_, Natalia Dimitrievna, I will
thank you not to laugh at me! I may not have been asked here, but at all
events _I_ did not dance a can-can for the prince’s benefit. What may
_you_ be laughing at, Mrs. Antipova? I suppose you haven’t heard that your
_great friend_ Lushiloff has broken his leg?—he has just been taken home.
Tfu! Good-bye, Maria Alexandrovna—good luck to you! Tfu!”

Sophia Petrovna now disappeared. All the guests laughed; Maria
Alexandrovna was in a state of indescribable fury.

“I think the good lady must have been drinking!” said Natalia Dimitrievna,
sweetly.

“But what audacity!”

“_Quelle abominable femme!_”

“What a raving lunatic!”

“But really, what excessively improper things she says!”

“Yes, but what _could_ she have meant by a ’betrothal party?’ What sort of
a betrothal party is this?” asked Felisata Michaelovna innocently.

“It is too bad—too bad!” Maria Alexandrovna burst out at last. “It is just
such abominable women as this that sow nonsensical rumours about! it is
not the fact that there _are_ such women about, Felisata Michaelovna, that
is so surprising; the astonishing part of the matter is that ladies can be
found who support and encourage them, and believe their abominable tales,
and——”

“The prince, the prince!” cried all the guests at once.

“Oh, oh, here he is—the dear, dear prince!”

“Well, thank goodness, we shall hear all the particulars now!” murmured
Felisata Michaelovna to her neighbour.





CHAPTER XIII.


The prince entered and smiled benignly around.

All the agitation which his conversation with Mosgliakoff, a quarter of an
hour since, had aroused in his chicken-heart vanished at the sight of the
ladies.

Those gentle creatures received him with chirps and exclamations of joy.
Ladies always petted our old friend the prince, and were—as a
rule—wonderfully familiar with him. He had a way of amusing them with his
own individuality which was astonishing! Only this morning Felisata
Michaelovna had announced that she would sit on his knee with the greatest
pleasure, if he liked; “because he was such a dear old pet of an old man!”

Maria Alexandrovna fastened her eyes on him, to read—if she could—if it
were but the slightest indication of his state of mind, and to get a
possible idea for a way out of this horribly critical position. But there
was nothing to be made of _his_ face; it was just as before—just as ever
it was!

“Ah—h! here’s the prince at last!” cried several voices. “Oh, Prince, how
we have waited and waited for you!”

“With impatience, Prince, with impatience!” another chorus took up the
strain.

“Dear me, how very flat—tering!” said the old man, settling himself near
the tea-table.

The ladies immediately surrounded him. There only remained Natalia
Dimitrievna and Mrs. Antipova with the hostess. Afanassy stood and smiled
with great courtesy.

Mosgliakoff also smiled as he gazed defiantly at Zina, who, without taking
the slightest notice of him, took a chair near her father, and sat down at
the fireside.

“Prince, do tell us—is it true that you are about to leave us so soon?”
asked Felisata Michaelovna.

“Yes, yes, _mesdames_; I am going abroad almost im—mediately!”

“Abroad, Prince, abroad? Why, what can have caused you to take such a step
as that?” cried several ladies at once.

“Yes—yes, abroad,” said the prince; “and do you know it is principally for
the sake of the new i—deas——”

“How, new ideas? what new ideas—what does he mean?” the astonished ladies
asked of one another.

“Ye—yes. Quite so—new ideas!” repeated the prince with an air of deep
conviction, “everybody goes abroad now for new ideas, and I’m going too,
to see if I can pick any up.”

Up to this moment Maria Alexandrovna had listened to the conversation
observantly; but it now struck her that the prince had entirely forgotten
her existence—which would not do!

“Allow me, Prince, to introduce my husband, Afanassy Matveyevitch. He
hastened up from our country seat so soon as ever he heard of your arrival
in our house.”

Afanassy, under the impression that he was being praised, smiled amiably
and beamed all over.

“Very happy, very happy—Afanassy Mat—veyevitch!” said the prince. “Wait a
moment: your name reminds me of something, Afanassy Mat—veyevitch; ye—yes,
you are the man down at the village! Charming, charm—ing! Very glad, I’m
sure. Do you remember, my boy,” (to Paul) “the nice little rhyme we fitted
out to him? What was it?”

“Oh, I know, prince,” said Felisata Michaelovna—

“ ‘When the husband’s away
The wife will play!”

“Wasn’t that it? We had it last year at the theatre.”

“Yes, yes, quite so, ye—yes, ‘the wife will play!’ That’s it: charming,
charming. So you are that ve—ry man? Dear me, I’m _very_ glad, I’m sure,”
said the prince, stretching out his hand, but not rising from his chair.
“Dear me, and how is your health, my dear sir?”

“H’m!”

“Oh, he’s quite well, thank you, prince, _quite_ well,” answered Maria
Alexandrovna quickly.

“Ye—yes, I see he is—he looks it! And are you still at the vill—age? Dear
me, very pleased, I’m sure; why, how red he looks, and he’s always
laugh—ing.”

Afanassy smiled and bowed, and even “scraped,” as the prince spoke, but at
the last observation he suddenly, and without warning or apparent reason,
burst into loud fits of laughter.

The ladies were delighted. Zina flushed up, and with flashing eyes darted
a look at her mother, who, in her turn, was boiling over with rage.

It was time to change the conversation.

“Did you have a nice nap, prince?” she inquired in honied accents; but at
the same time giving Afanassy to understand, with very un-honied looks
that he might go—well, anywhere!

“Oh, I slept won—derfully, wonderfully? And do you know, I had such a most
fascinating, be—witching dream!”

“A dream? how delightful! I do so love to hear people tell their dreams,”
cried Felisata.

“Oh, a fas—cinating dream,” stammered the old man again, “quite
be—witching, but all the more a dead secret for that very reas—on.”

“Oh, Prince, you don’t mean to say you can’t tell us?” said Mrs. Antipova.
“I suppose it’s an _extraordinary_ dream, isn’t it?”

“A dead secret!” repeated the prince, purposely whetting the curiosity of
the ladies, and enjoying the fun.

“Then it _must_ be interesting, oh, _dreadfully_ interesting,” cried other
ladies.

“I don’t mind taking a bet that the prince dreamed that he was kneeling at
some lovely woman’s feet and making a declaration of love,” said Felisata
Michaelovna. “Confess, now, prince, that it was so? confess, dear prince,
confess.”

“Yes, Prince, confess!” the chorus took up the cry. The old man listened
solemnly until the last voice was hushed. The ladies’ guesswork flattered
his vanity wonderfully; he was as pleased as he could be. “Though I did
say that my dream was a dead se—cret,” he replied at last, “still I am
obliged to confess, dear lady, that to my great as—tonishment you have
almost exactly guessed it.”

“I’ve guessed it, I’ve guessed it,” cried Felisata, in a rapture of joy.
“Well, prince, say what you like, but it’s your _plain_ duty to tell us
the name of your beauty; come now, _isn’t_ it?”

“Of course, of course, prince.”

“Is she in this town?”

“Dear prince, _do_ tell us.”

“_Darling_ prince, do, _do_ tell us; you positively _must_,” was heard on
all sides.

“_Mesdames, mes—dames_; if you must know, I will go so far as to say that
it is the most charming, and be—witching, and vir—tuous lady I know,” said
the prince, unctuously.

“The most bewitching? and belonging to this place? Who _can_ it be?” cried
the ladies, interchanging looks and signs.

“Why, of course, the young lady who is considered the reigning beauty
here,” remarked Natalia Dimitrievna, rubbing her hands and looking hard at
Zina with those cat’s-eyes of hers. All joined her in staring at Zina.

“But, prince, if you dream those sort of things, why should not you marry
somebody _bona fide_?” asked Felisata, looking around her with a
significant expression.

“We would marry you off beautifully, prince!” said somebody else.

“Oh, dear prince, _do_ marry!” chirped another.

“Marry, marry, _do_ marry!” was now the cry on all sides.

“Ye—yes. Why should I not ma—arry!” said the old man, confused and
bewildered with all the cries and exclamations around him.

“Uncle!” cried Mosgliakoff.

“Ye—yes, my boy, quite so; I un—derstand what you mean. I may as well tell
you, ladies, that I am not in a position to marry again; and having passed
one most delightful evening with our fascinating hostess, I must start
away to-morrow to the Hermitage, and then I shall go straight off abroad,
and study the question of the enlightenment of Europe.”

Zina shuddered, and looked over at her mother with an expression of
unspeakable anguish.

But Maria Alexandrovna had now made up her mind how to act; all this while
she had played a mere waiting game, observing closely and carefully all
that was said or done, although she could see only too clearly that her
plans were undermined, and that her foes had come about her in numbers
which were too great to be altogether pleasant.

At last, however, she comprehended the situation, she thought, completely.
She had gauged how the matter stood in all its branches, and she
determined to slay the hundred-headed hydra at one fell blow!

With great majesty, then, she rose from her seat, and approached the
tea-table, stalking across the room with firm and dignified tread, as she
looked around upon her pigmy foes. The fire of inspiration blazed in her
eyes. She resolved to smite once, and annihilate this vile nest of
poisonous scandal-adders: to destroy the miserable Mosgliakoff, as though
he were a blackbeetle, and with one triumphant blow to reassert all her
influence over this miserable old idiot-prince!

Some audacity was requisite for such a performance, of course; but Maria
Alexandrovna had not even to put her hand in her pocket for a supply of
that particular commodity.

“_Mesdames_,” she began, solemnly, and with much dignity (Maria
Alexandrovna was always a great admirer of solemnity); “_mesdames_, I have
been a listener to your conversation—to your witty remarks and merry
jokes—long enough, and I consider that my turn has come, at last, to put
in a word in contribution.

“You are aware we have all met here accidentally (to my great joy, I must
add—to my very great joy); but, though I should be the first to refuse to
divulge a family secret before the strictest rules of ordinary propriety
rendered such a revelation necessary, yet, as my dear guest here appears
to me to have given us to understand, by covert hints and insinuations,
that he is not averse to the matter becoming common property (he will
forgive me if I have mistaken his intentions!)—I cannot help feeling that
the prince is not only not averse, but actually desires me to make known
our great family secret. Am I right, Prince?”

“Ye—yes, quite so, quite so! Very glad, ve—ry glad, I’m sure!” said the
prince, who had not the remotest idea what the good lady was talking
about!

Maria Alexandrovna, for greater effect, now paused to take breath, and
looked solemnly and proudly around upon the assembled guests, all of whom
were now listening with greedy but slightly disturbed curiosity to what
their hostess was about to reveal to them.

Mosgliakoff shuddered; Zina flushed up, and arose from her seat; Afanassy,
seeing that something important was about to happen, blew his nose
violently, in order to be ready for any emergency.

“Yes, ladies; I am ready—nay, gratified—to entrust my family secret to
your keeping!——This evening, the prince, overcome by the beauty and
virtues of my daughter, has done her the honour of proposing to me for her
hand. Prince,” she concluded, in trembling tearful accents, “dear Prince;
you must not, you cannot blame me for my candour! It is only my
overwhelming joy that could have torn this dear secret prematurely from my
heart: and what mother is there who will blame me in such a case as this?”

Words fail me to describe the effect produced by this most unexpected
sally on the part of Maria Alexandrovna. All present appeared to be struck
dumb with amazement. These perfidious guests, who had thought to frighten
Maria Alexandrovna by showing her that they knew her secret; who thought
to annihilate her by the premature revelation of that secret; who thought
to overwhelm her, for the present, with their hints and insinuations;
these guests were themselves struck down and pulverized by this fearless
candour on her part! Such audacious frankness argued the consciousness of
strength.

“So that the prince actually, and of his own free-will is really going to
marry Zina? So they did not drink and bully and swindle him into it? So he
is not to be married burglariously and forcibly? So Maria Alexandrovna is
not afraid of anybody? Then we can’t knock this marriage on the head—since
the prince is not being married compulsorily!”

Such were the questions and exclamations the visitors now put to
themselves and each other.

But very soon the whispers which the hostess’s words had awakened all over
the room, suddenly changed to chirps and exclamations of joy.

Natalia Dimitrievna was the first to come forward and embrace Maria
Alexandrovna; then came Mrs. Antipova; next Felisata Michaelovna. All
present were shortly on their feet and moving about, changing places. Many
of the ladies were pale with rage. Some began to congratulate Zina, who
was confused enough without; some attached themselves to the wretched
Afanassy Matveyevitch. Maria Alexandrovna stretched her arms theatrically,
and embraced her daughter—almost by force.

The prince alone gazed upon the company with a sort of confused wonder;
but he smiled on as before. He seemed to be pleased with the scene. At
sight of the mother and daughter embracing, he took out his handkerchief,
and wiped his eye, in the corner of which there really was a tear.

Of course the company fell upon him with their congratulations before very
long.

“I congratulate you, Prince! I congratulate you!” came from all sides at
once.

“So you _are_ going to be married, Prince?”

“So you _really are_ going to marry?”

“Dear Prince! You really are to be married, then?”

“Ye—yes, ye—yes; quite so, quite so!” replied the old fellow, delighted
beyond measure with all the rapture and atmosphere of congratulation
around him; “and I confess what I like best of all, is the ve—ery kind
in—terest you all take in me! I shall never forget it, never for—get it!
Charming! charming! You have brought the tears to my eyes!”

“Kiss me, prince!” cried Felisata Michaelovna, in stentorian tones.

“And I con—fess further,” continued the Prince, as well as the constant
physical interruptions from all sides allowed him; “I confess I am beyond
measure as—tonished that Maria Alexandrovna, our revered hostess, should
have had the extraordinary penet—ration to guess my dream! She might have
dreamed it herself, instead of me. Ex—traordinary perspicacity!
Won—derful, wonderful!”

“Oh, prince; your dream again!”

“Oh, come, prince! admit—confess!” cried one and all.

“Yes, prince, it is no use concealing it now; it is time we divulged this
secret of ours!” said Maria Alexandrovna, severely and decidedly. “I quite
entered into your refined, allegorical manner; the delightful delicacy
with which you gave me to understand, by means of subtle insinuations,
that you wished the fact of your engagement to be made known. Yes, ladies,
it is all true! This very evening the prince knelt at my daughter’s feet,
and actually, and by no means in a dream, made a solemn proposal of
marriage to her!”

“Yes—yes, quite so! just exactly like that; and under the very
cir—cumstances she describes: just like re—ality,” said the old man. “My
dear young lady,” he continued, bowing with his greatest courtesy to Zina,
who had by no means recovered from her amazement as yet; “my dear young
lady, I swear to you, I should never have dared thus to bring your name
into pro—minence, if others had not done so before me! It was a most
be—witching dream! a be—witching dream! and I am doubly happy that I have
been per—mitted to describe it. Charming—charming!”

“Dear me! how very curious it is: he insists on sticking to his idea about
a dream!” whispered Mrs. Antipova to the now slightly paling Maria
Alexandrovna. Alas! that great woman had felt her heart beating more
quickly than she liked without this last little reminder!

“What does it mean?” whispered the ladies among themselves.

“Excuse me, prince,” began Maria Alexandrovna, with a miserable attempt at
a smile, “but I confess you astonish me a great deal! What is this strange
idea of yours about a dream? I confess I had thought you were joking up to
this moment; but—if it be a joke on your part, it is exceedingly out of
place! I should like—I am _anxious_ to ascribe your conduct to absence of
mind, but——”

“Yes; it may really be a case of absence of mind!” put in Natalia
Dimitrievna in a whisper.

“Yes—yes—of course, quite so; it may easily be absence of mind!” confirmed
the prince, who clearly did not in the least comprehend what they were
trying to get out of him; “and with regard to this subject, let me tell
you a little an—ecdote. I was asked to a funeral at Petersburg, and I went
and made a little mis—take about it and thought it was a birthday par—ty!
So I brought a lovely bouquet of cam—ellias! When I came in and saw the
master of the house lying in state on a table, I didn’t know where to
lo—ok, or what to do with my ca—mellias, I assure you!”

“Yes; but, Prince, this is not the moment for stories!” observed Maria
Alexandrovna, with great annoyance. “Of course, my daughter has no need to
beat up a husband; but at the same time, I must repeat that you yourself
here, just by the piano, made her an offer of marriage. _I_ did not ask
you to do it! I may say I was amazed to hear it! However, since the
episode of your proposal, I may say that I have thought of nothing else;
and I have only waited for your appearance to talk the matter over with
you. But now—well, I am a mother, and this is my daughter. You speak of a
dream. I supposed, naturally, that you were anxious to make your
engagement known by the medium of an allegory. Well, I am perfectly well
aware that someone may have thought fit to confuse your mind on this
matter; in fact, I may say that I have my suspicions as to the individual
responsible for such a——however, kindly explain yourself, Prince; explain
yourself quickly and satisfactorily. You cannot be permitted to jest in
this fashion in a respectable house.”

“Ye—yes—quite so, quite so; one should not jest in respectable houses,”
remarked the prince, still bewildered, but beginning gradually to grow a
little disconcerted.

“But that is no answer to my question, Prince. I ask you to reply
categorically. I insist upon your confirming—confirming here and at
once—the fact that this very evening you made a proposal of marriage to my
daughter!”

“Quite so—quite so; I am ready to confirm that! But I have told the
com—pany all about it, and Felisata Michaelovna ac—tually guessed my
dream!”

“_Not dream!_ it was _not_ a dream!” shouted Maria Alexandrovna furiously.
“It was not a dream, Prince, but you were wide awake. Do you hear?
Awake—you were _awake_!”

“Awake?” cried the prince, rising from his chair in astonishment. “Well,
there you are, my friend; it has come about just as you said,” he added,
turning to Mosgliakoff. “But I assure you, most es—teemed Maria
Alexandrovna, that you are under a del—usion. I am quite convinced that I
saw the whole scene in a dream!”

“Goodness gracious!” cried Maria Alexandrovna.

“Do not disturb yourself, dear Maria Alexandrovna,” said Natalia
Dimitrievna, “probably the prince has forgotten; he will recollect himself
by and by.”

“I am astonished at you, Natalia Dimitrievna!” said the now furious
hostess. “As if people forget this sort of thing! Excuse me, Prince, but
are you laughing at us, or what are you doing? Are you trying to act one
of Dumas’ heroes, or Lauzun or Ferlacourt, or somebody? But, if you will
excuse me saying so, you are a good deal too old for that sort of thing,
and I assure you, your amiable little play-acting will not do here! My
daughter is not a French viscountess! I tell you, this very evening and in
this very spot here, my daughter sang a ballad to you, and you, amazed at
the beauty of her singing, went down on your knees and made her a proposal
of marriage. I am not talking in my sleep, am I? Surely I am wide awake?
Speak, Prince, am I asleep, or not?”

“Ye—yes, of course, of course—quite so. I don’t know,” said the bewildered
old man. “I mean, I don’t think I am drea—ming now; but, a little while
ago I _was_ asleep, you see; and while asleep I had this dream, that I——”

“Goodness me, Prince, I tell you you were _not_ dreaming. _Not dreaming_,
do you hear? _Not_ dreaming! What on earth do you mean? Are you raving,
Prince, or what?”

“Ye—yes; deuce only knows. I don’t know! It seems to me I’m getting
be—wildered,” said the prince, looking around him in a state of
considerable mental perturbation.

“But, my dear Prince, how can you possibly have _dreamed_ this, when I can
tell you all the minutest details of your proposal and of the
circumstances attending it? You have not told any of us of these details.
How could I possibly have known what you dreamed?”

“But, perhaps the prince _did_ tell someone of his dream, in detail,”
remarked Natalia Dimitrievna.

“Ye—yes, quite so—quite so! Perhaps I did tell someone all about my dream,
in detail,” said the now completely lost and bewildered prince.

“Here’s a nice comedy!” whispered Felisata Michaelovna to her neighbour.

“My goodness me! this is too much for _anybody’s_ patience!” cried Maria
Alexandrovna, beside herself with helpless rage. “Do you hear me, Prince?
She sang you a ballad—_sang you a ballad_! Surely you didn’t dream that
too?”

“Certainly—cer—tainly, quite so. It really did seem to me that she sang me
a ballad,” murmured the prince; and a ray of recollection seemed to flash
across his face. “My friend,” he continued, addressing Mosgliakoff, “I
believe I forgot to tell you, there was a ballad sung—a ballad all about
castles and knights; and some trou—badour or other came in. Of course, of
course, I remember it all quite well. I recoll—ect I did turn over the
ballad. It puzzles me much, for now it seems as though I had really heard
the ballad, and not dreamt it all.”

“I confess, uncle,” said Mosgliakoff, as calmly as he could, though his
voice shook with agitation, “I confess I do not see any difficulty in
bringing your actual experience and your dream into strict conformity; it
is consistent enough. You probably _did_ hear the ballad. Miss Zenaida
sings beautifully; probably you all adjourned into this room and Zenaida
Afanassievna sang you the song. Of course, I was not there myself, but in
all probability this ballad reminded you of old times; very likely it
reminded you of that very vicomtesse with whom you used once to sing, and
of whom you were speaking to-day; well, and then, when you went up for
your nap and lay down, thinking of the delightful impressions made upon
you by the ballad and all, you dreamed that you were in love and made an
offer of marriage to the lady who had inspired you with that feeling.”

Maria Alexandrovna was struck dumb by this display of barefaced audacity.

“Why, ye—yes, my boy, yes, of course; that’s exactly how it really wa—as!”
cried the prince, in an ecstasy of delight. “Of course it was the
de—lightful impressions that caused me to dream it. I certainly re—member
the song; and then I went away and dreamed about my pro—posal, and that I
really wished to marry! The viscountess was there too. How beautifully you
have unravelled the diffi—culty, my dear boy. Well, now I am quite
convinced that it was all a dream. Maria Alex—androvna! I assure you, you
are under a delu—usion: it was a dream. I should not think of trifling
with your feelings otherwise.”

“Oh, indeed! Now I perceive very clearly whom we have to thank for making
this dirty mess of our affairs!” cried Maria Alexandrovna, beside herself
with rage, and turning to Mosgliakoff: “You are the man, sir—the
_dishonest_ person. It is you who stirred up this mud! It is you that
puzzled an unhappy old idiot into this eccentric behaviour, because you
yourself were rejected! But we shall be quits, my friend, for this
offence! You shall pay, you shall pay! Wait a bit, my dishonest friend;
wait a bit!”

“Maria Alexandrovna!” cried Mosgliakoff, blushing in his turn until he
looked as red as a boiled lobster, “your words are so, so——to such an
extent—I really don’t know how to express my opinion of you. No lady would
ever permit herself to—to—. At all events I am but protecting my relative.
You must allow that to _allure_ an old man like this is, is——.”

“Quite so, quite so; _allure_,” began the prince, trying to hide himself
behind Mosgliakoff.

“Afanassy Matveyevitch!” cried Maria Alexandrovna, in unnatural tones; “do
you hear, sir, how these people are shaming and insulting me? Have you
_quite_ exempted yourself from all the responsibilities of a man? Or are
you actually a—a wooden block, instead of the father of a family? What do
you stand blinking there for? eh! Any other husband would have wiped out
such an insult to his family with the blood of the offender long ago.”

“Wife!” began Afanassy, solemnly, delighted, and proud to find that a need
for him had sprung up for once in his life. “Wife, are you quite certain,
now, that _you_ did not dream all this? You might so easily have fallen
asleep and dreamed it, and then muddled it all up with what really
happened, you know, and so——”

But Afanassy Matveyevitch was never destined to complete his ingenious,
but unlucky guess.

Up to this moment the guests had all restrained themselves, and had
managed, cleverly enough, to keep up an appearance of solid and judicial
interest in the proceedings. But at the first sound, almost, of Afanassy’s
voice, a burst of uncontrollable laughter rose like a tempest from all
parts of the room.

Maria Alexandrovna, forgetting all the laws of propriety in her fury,
tried to rush at her unlucky consort; but she was held back by force, or,
doubtless, she would have scratched out that gentleman’s eyes.

Natalia Dimitrievna took advantage of the occasion to add a little, if
only a little, drop more of poison to the bitter cup.

“But, dear Maria Alexandrovna,” she said, in the sweetest honied tones,
“perhaps it may be that it really _was_ so, as your husband suggests, and
that you are actually under a strange delusion?”

“How! What was a delusion?” cried Maria Alexandrovna, not quite catching
the remark.

“Why, my dear Maria, I was saying, _mightn’t_ it have been so, dear, after
all? These sort of things _do_ happen sometimes, you know!”

“_What_ sort of things do happen, eh? What are you trying to do with me?
What am I to make of you?”

“Why, perhaps, dear, you really _did_ dream it all!”

“What? _dream_ it! _I_ dreamed it? And you dare suggest such a thing to
me—straight to my face?”

“Oh, why not? Perhaps it really was the case,” observed Felisata
Michaelovna.

“Ye—yes, quite so, very likely it act—ually _was_ the case,” muttered the
old prince.

“He, too—gracious Heaven!” cried poor Maria Alexandrovna, wringing her
hands.

“Dear me, how you do worry yourself, Maria Alexandrovna. You should
remember that dreams are sent us by a good Providence. If Providence so
wills it, there is no more to be said. Providence gives the word, and we
can neither weep nor be angry at its dictum.”

“Quite so, quite so. We can’t be a—angry about it,” observed the prince.

“Look here; do you take me for a lunatic, or not?” said Maria
Alexandrovna. She spoke with difficulty, so dreadfully was she panting
with fury. It was more than flesh and blood could stand. She hurriedly
grasped a chair, and fell fainting into it. There was a scene of great
excitement.

“She has fainted in obedience to the laws of propriety!” observed Natalia
Dimitrievna to Mrs. Antipova. But at this moment—at this moment when the
general bewilderment and confusion had reached its height, and when the
scene was strained to the last possible point of excitement, another actor
suddenly stepped to the front; one who had been silent hitherto, but who
immediately threw quite a different complexion on the scene.





CHAPTER XIV.


Zenaida, or Zina Afanassievna, was an individual of an extremely romantic
turn of mind.

I don’t know whether it really was that she had read too much of “that
fool Shakespeare,” with her “little tutor fellow,” as Maria Alexandrovna
insisted; but, at all events she was very romantic. However, never, in all
her experience of Mordasoff life, had Zina before made such an
ultra-romantic, or perhaps I might call it _heroic_, display as on the
occasion of the sally which I am now about to describe.

Pale, and with resolution in her eyes, yet almost trembling with
agitation, and wonderfully beautiful in her anger and scorn, she stepped
to the front.

Gazing around at all, defiantly, she approached her mother in the midst of
the sudden silence which had fallen on all present. Her mother roused
herself from her swoon at the first indication of a projected movement on
Zina’s part, and she now opened her eyes.

“Mamma!” cried Zina, “why should we deceive anyone? Why befoul ourselves
with more lies? Everything is so foul already that surely it is not worth
while to bemean ourselves any further by attempting to gloss over the
filth!”

“Zina, Zina! what are you thinking of? _Do_ recollect yourself!” cried
Maria Alexandrovna, frightened out of her wits, and jumping briskly up
from her chair.

“I told you, mamma—I told you before, that I should not be able to last
out the length of this shameful and ignominious business!” continued Zina.
“Surely we need no further bemean and befoul ourselves! I will take it all
on myself, mamma. I am the basest of all, for lending myself, of my own
free will, to this abominable intrigue! You are my mother; you love me, I
know, and you wished to arrange matters for my happiness, as you thought
best, and according to your lights. _Your_ conduct, therefore, is
pardonable; but mine! oh, no! never, never!”

“Zina, Zina! surely you are not going to tell the whole story? Oh! woe,
woe! I felt that the knife would pierce my heart!”

“Yes, mamma, I shall tell all; I am disgraced, you—we all of us are
disgraced——”

“Zina, you are exaggerating! you are beside yourself; and you don’t know
what you are saying. And why say anything about it? The ignominy and
disgrace is not on our side, dear child; I will show in a moment that it
is not on our side!”

“No, mamma, no!” cried Zina, with a quiver of rage in her voice, “I do not
wish to remain silent any longer before these—persons, whose opinion I
despise, and who have come here for the purpose of laughing at us. I do
not wish to stand insult from any one of them; none of them have any right
to throw dirt at me; every single one of them would be ready at any moment
to do things thirty times as bad as anything either I or you have done or
would do! Dare they, _can_ they constitute themselves our judges?”

“Listen to that!”

“There’s a pretty little speech for you!”

“Why, that’s _us_ she’s abusing”!

“A nice sort of creature she is herself!”

These and other such-like exclamations greeted the conclusion of Zina’s
speech.

“Oh, she simply doesn’t know what she’s talking about!” observed Natalia
Dimitrievna.

We will make a digression, and remark that Natalia Dimitrievna was quite
right there!

For if Zina did not consider these women competent to judge herself, why
should she trouble herself to make those exposures and admissions which
she proposed to reveal in their presence? Zina was in much too great a
hurry. (She always was,—so the best heads in Mordasoff had agreed!) All
might have been set right; all might have been satisfactorily arranged!
Maria Alexandrovna was a great deal to blame this night, too! She had been
too much “in a hurry,” like her daughter,—and too arrogant! She should
have simply raised the laugh at the old prince’s expense, and turned him
out of the house! But Zina, in despite of all common sense (as indicated
above), and of the sage opinions of all Mordasoff, addressed herself to
the prince:

“Prince,” she said to the old man, who actually rose from his arm-chair to
show his respect for the speaker, so much was he struck by her at this
moment!—“Prince forgive us; we have deceived you; we entrapped you——”

“_Will_ you be quiet, you wretched girl?” cried Maria Alexandrovna, wild
with rage.

“My dear young lady—my dear child, my darling child!” murmured the
admiring prince.

But the proud haughty character of Zina had led her on to cross the
barrier of all propriety;—she even forgot her own mother who lay fainting
at her feet—a victim to the self-exposure her daughter indulged in.

“Yes, prince, we both cheated you. Mamma was in fault in that she
determined that I must marry you; and I in that I consented thereto. We
filled you with wine; I sang to you and postured and posed for your
admiration. We tricked you, a weak defenceless old man, we _tricked_ you
(as Mr. Mosgliakoff would express it!) for the sake of your wealth, and
your rank. All this was shockingly mean, and I freely admit the fact. But
I swear to you, Prince, that I consented to all this baseness from motives
which were _not_ base. I wished,—but what a wretch I am! it is doubly mean
to justify one’s conduct in such a case as this! But I will tell you,
Prince, that if I had accepted anything from you, I should have made it up
to you for it, by being your plaything, your servant, your—your ballet
dancer, your slave—anything you wished. I had sworn to this, and I should
have kept my oath.”

A severe spasm at the throat stopped her for a moment; while all the
guests sat and listened like so many blocks of wood, their eyes and mouths
wide open.

This unexpected, and to them perfectly unintelligible sally on Zina’s part
had utterly confounded them. The old prince alone was touched to tears,
though he did not understand half that Zina said.

“But I will marry you, my beau—t—iful child, I _will_ marry you, if you
like”—he murmured, “and est—eem it a great honour, too! But I as—sure you
it was all a dream,—what does it mat—ter what I dream? Why should you take
it so to heart? I don’t seem to under—stand it all; please explain, my
dear friend, what it all means!” he added, to Paul.

“As for you, Pavel Alexandrovitch,” Zina recommenced, also turning to
Mosgliakoff, “you whom I had made up my mind, at one time, to look upon as
my future husband; you who have now so cruelly revenged yourself upon me;
must you needs have allied yourself to these people here, whose object at
all times is to humiliate and shame me? And you said that you loved me!
However, it is not for me to preach moralities to you, for I am worse than
all! I wronged you, distinctly, in holding out false hopes and half
promises. I never loved you, and if I had agreed to be your wife, it would
have been solely with the view of getting away from here, out of this
accursed town, and free of all this meanness and baseness. However, I
swear to you that had I married you, I should have been a good and
faithful wife! You have taken a cruel vengeance upon me, and if that
flatters your pride, then——”

“Zina!” cried Mosgliakoff.

“If you still hate me——”

“Zina!!”

“If you ever did love me——”

“Zenaida Afanassievna!”

“Zina, Zina—my child!” cried Maria Alexandrovna.

“I am a blackguard, Zina—a blackguard, and nothing else!” cried
Mosgliakoff; while all the assembled ladies gave way to violent agitation.
Cries of amazement and of wrath broke upon the silence; but Mosgliakoff
himself stood speechless and miserable, without a thought and without a
word to plead for him!

“I am an ass, Zina,” he cried at last, in an outburst of wild despair,—“an
ass! oh far, far worse than an ass. But I will prove to you, Zina, that
even an ass can behave like a generous human being! Uncle, I cheated you!
I, I—it was I who cheated you: you were _not_ asleep,—you were wide awake
when you made this lady an offer of marriage! And I—scoundrel that I
was—out of revenge because I was rejected by her myself, persuaded you
that you had dreamed it all!”

“Dear me, what wonderful and interesting revelations we are being treated
to now!” whispered Natalia to Mrs. Antipova.

“My dear friend,” replied the prince, “com—pose yourself, do! I assure
you—you quite start—led me with that sudden ex—clamation of yours!
Besides, you are labouring under a delusion;—I will marr—y the lady, of
course, if ne—cessary. But you told me, yourself, it was all a dre—eam!”

“Oh, how am I to tell you? Do show me, somebody, how to explain to him!
Uncle, uncle! this is an important matter—a most important family affair!
Think of that, uncle—just try to realise that——”

“Wait a bit, my boy—wait a bit: let me think! First there was my coachman,
Theophile——”

“Oh, never mind Theophile now, for goodness sake!”

“Of course we need not waste time over The—ophile. Well—then came
Na—poleon; and then we seemed to be sitting at tea, and some la—dy came
and ate up all our su—gar!”

“But, uncle!” cried Mosgliakoff, at his wits’ end, “it was Maria
Alexandrovna herself told us that anecdote about Natalia Dimitrievna! I
was here myself and heard it!—I was a blackguard, and listened at the
keyhole!”

“How, Maria Alexandrovna!” cried Natalia, “you’ve told the prince too,
have you, that I stole sugar out of your basin? So I come to you to steal
your sugar, do I, eh! do I?”

“Get away from me!” cried Maria Alexandrovna, with the abandonment of
utter despair.

“Oh, dear no! I shall do nothing of the sort, Maria Alexandrovna! I steal
your sugar, do I? I tell you you shall not talk of me like that, madam—you
dare not! I have long suspected you of spreading this sort of rubbish
abroad about me! Sophia Petrovna came and told me all about it. So I stole
your sugar, did I, eh?”

“But, my dear la—dies!” said the prince, “it was only part of a dream!
What do my dreams matter?——”

“Great tub of a woman!” muttered Maria Alexandrovna through her teeth.

“What! what! I’m a tub, too, am I?” shrieked Natalia Dimitrievna. “And
what are you yourself, pray? Oh, I have long known that you call me a tub,
madam. Never mind!—at all events my husband is a man, madam, and not a
fool, like yours!”

“Ye—yes—quite so! I remember there _was_ something about a tub, too!”
murmured the old man, with a vague recollection of his late conversation
with Maria Alexandrovna.

“What—_you_, too? _you_ join in abusing a respectable woman of noble
extraction, do you? How dare you call me names, prince—you wretched old
one-legged misery! I’m a tub am I, you one-legged old abomination?”

“Wha—at, madam, I one-legged?”

“Yes—one-legged and toothless, sir; that’s what you are!”

“Yes, and one-eyed too!” shouted Maria Alexandrovna.

“And what’s more, you wear stays instead of having your own ribs!” added
Natalia Dimitrievna.

“His face is all on wire springs!”

“He hasn’t a hair of his own to swear by!”

“Even the old fool’s moustache is stuck on!” put in Maria Alexandrovna.

“Well, Ma—arie Alexandrovna, give me the credit of having a nose of my
ve—ry own, at all events!” said the prince, overwhelmed with confusion
under these unexpected disclosures. “My friend, it must have been you
betrayed me! _you_ must have told them that my hair is stuck on?”

“Uncle, what an idea, I——!”

“My dear boy, I can’t stay here any lon—ger, take me away
somewhere—_quelle société_! Where have you brought me to, eh?—Gracious
Hea—eaven, what dreadful soc—iety!”

“Idiot! scoundrel!” shrieked Maria Alexandrovna.

“Goodness!” said the unfortunate old prince. “I can’t quite remember just
now what I came here for at all—I suppose I shall reme—mber directly. Take
me away, quick, my boy, or I shall be torn to pieces here! Besides, I have
an i—dea that I want to make a note of——”

“Come along, uncle—it isn’t very late; I’ll take you over to an hotel at
once, and I’ll move over my own things too.”

“Ye—yes, of course, a ho—tel! Good-bye, my charming child; you alone,
you—are the only vir—tuous one of them all; you are a no—oble child.
Good-bye, my charming girl! Come along, my friend;—oh, good gra—cious,
what people!”

I will not attempt to describe the end of this disagreeable scene, after
the prince’s departure.

The guests separated in a hurricane of scolding and abuse and mutual
vituperation, and Maria Alexandrovna was at last left alone amid the ruins
and relics of her departed glory.

Alas, alas! Power, glory, weight—all had disappeared in this one
unfortunate evening. Maria Alexandrovna quite realised that there was no
chance of her ever again mounting to the height from which she had now
fallen. Her long preeminence and despotism over society in general had
collapsed.

What remained to her? Philosophy? She was wild with the madness of despair
all night! Zina was dishonoured—scandals would circulate, never-ceasing
scandals; and—oh! it was dreadful!

As a faithful historian, I must record that poor Afanassy was the
scapegoat this night; he “caught it” so terribly that he eventually
disappeared; he had hidden himself in the garret, and was there starved to
death almost, with cold, all night.

The morning came at last; but it brought nothing good with it! Misfortunes
never come singly.





CHAPTER XV.


If fate makes up its mind to visit anyone with misfortune, there is no end
to its malice! This fact has often been remarked by thinkers; and, as if
the ignominy of last night were not enough, the same malicious destiny had
prepared for this family more, yea, and worse—evils to come!

By ten o’clock in the morning a strange and almost incredible rumour was
in full swing all over the town: it was received by society, of course,
with full measure of spiteful joy, just as we all love to receive
delightfully scandalous stories of anyone about us.

“To lose one’s sense of shame to such an extent!” people said one to
another.

“To humiliate oneself so, and to neglect the first rules of propriety! To
loose the bands of decency altogether like this, really!” etc., etc.

But here is what had happened.

Early in the morning, something after six o’clock, a poor piteous-looking
old woman came hurriedly to the door of Maria Alexandrovna’s house, and
begged the maid to wake Miss Zina up as quickly, as possible,—_only_ Miss
Zina, and very quietly, so that her mother should not hear of it, if
possible.

Zina, pale and miserable, ran out to the old woman immediately.

The latter fell at Zina’s feet and kissed them and begged her with tears
to come with her at once to see poor Vaísia, her son, who had been so bad,
_so_ bad all night that she did not think he could live another day.

The old woman told Zina that Vaísia had sent to beg her to come and bid
him farewell in this his death hour: he conjured her to come by all the
blessed angels, and by all their past—otherwise he must die in despair.

Zina at once decided to go, in spite of the fact that, by so doing, she
would be justifying all the scandal and slanders disseminated about her in
former days, as to the intercepted letter, her visits to him, and so on.
Without a word to her mother, then, she donned her cloak and started off
with the old woman, passing through the whole length of the town, into one
of the poorest slums of Mordasof—and stopped at a little low wretched
house, with small miserable windows, and snow piled round the basement for
warmth.

In this house, in a tiny room, more than half of which was occupied by an
enormous stove, on a wretched bed, and covered with a miserably thin
quilt, lay a young man, pale and haggard: his eyes were ablaze with the
fire of fever, his hands were dry and thin, and he was breathing with
difficulty and very hoarsely. He looked as though he might have been
handsome once, but disease had put its finger on his features and made
them dreadful to look upon and sad withal, as are so many dying
consumptive patients’ faces.

His old mother who had fed herself for a year past with the conviction
that her son would recover, now saw at last that Vaísia was not to live.
She stood over him, bowed down with her grief—tearless, and looked and
looked, and could not look enough; and felt, but could not realize, that
this dear son of hers must in a few days be buried in the miserable
Mordasof churchyard, far down beneath the snow and frozen earth!

But Vaísia was not looking at her at this moment! His poor suffering face
was at rest now, and happy; for he saw before him the dear image which he
had thought of, dreamed of, and loved through all the long sad nights of
his illness, for the last year and a half! He realised that she forgave
him, and had come, like an angel of God, to tell him of her forgiveness,
here, on his deathbed.

She pressed his hands, wept over him, stood and smiled over him, looked at
him once more with those wonderful eyes of hers, and all the past, the
undying ever-present past rose up before the mind’s eye of the dying man.
The spark of life flashed up again in his soul, as though to show, now
that it was about to die out for ever on this earth, how hard, how hard it
was to see so sweet a light fade away.

“Zina, Zina!” he said, “my Zina, do not weep; don’t grieve, Zina, don’t
remind me that I must die! Let me gaze at you, so—so,—and feel that our
two souls have come together once more—that you have forgiven me! Let me
kiss your dear hands again, as I used, and so let me die without noticing
the approach of death.

“How thin you have grown, Zina! and how sweetly you are looking at me now,
my Zina! Do you remember how you used to laugh, in bygone days? Oh, Zina,
my angel, I shall not ask you to forgive me,—I will not remember anything
about—that, you know what! for if you _do_ forgive me, I can never forgive
myself!

“All the long, long nights, Zina, I have lain here and thought, and
thought; and I have long since decided that I had better die, Zina; for I
am not fit to live!”

Zina wept, and silently pressed his hands, as though she would stop him
talking so.

“Why do you cry so?” continued the sick man. “Is it because I am dying?
but all the past is long since dead and buried, Zina, my angel! You are
wiser than I am, you know I am a bad, wicked man; surely you cannot love
me still? Do you know what it has cost me to realise that I am a bad man?
I, who have always prided myself before the world—and what on? Purity of
heart, generosity of aim! Yes, Zina, so I did, while we read Shakespeare;
and in theory I was pure and generous. Yet, how did I prove these
qualities in practice?”

“Oh, don’t! don’t!” sobbed Zina, “you are not fair to yourself: don’t talk
like this, please don’t!”

“Don’t stop me, Zina! You forgave me, my angel; I know you forgave me long
ago, but you must have judged me, and you know what sort of man I really
am; and that is what tortures me so! I am unworthy of your love, Zina! And
you were good and true, not only in theory, but in practice too! You told
your mother you would marry me, and no one else, and you would have kept
your word! Do you know, Zina, I never realized before what you would
sacrifice in marrying me! I could not even see that you might die of
hunger if you did so! All I thought of was that you would be the bride of
a great poet (in the future), and I could not understand your reasons for
wishing to delay our union! So I reproached you and bullied you, and
despised you and suspected you, and at last I committed the crime of
showing your letter! I was not even a scoundrel at that moment! I was
simply a worm-man. Ah! how you must have despised me! No, it is well that
I am dying; it is well that you did not marry me! I should not have
understood your sacrifice, and I should have worried you, and perhaps, in
time, have learned to hate you, and ... but now it is good, it is best so!
my bitter tears can at least cleanse my heart before I die. Ah! Zina!
Zina! love me, love me as you did before for a little, little while! just
for the last hour of my life. I know I am not worthy of it, but—oh, my
angel, my Zina!”

Throughout this speech Zina, sobbing herself, had several times tried to
stop the speaker; but he would not listen. He felt that he must unburden
his soul by speaking out, and continued to talk—though with difficulty,
panting, and with choking and husky utterance.

“Oh, if only you had never seen me and never loved me,” said Zina, “you
would have lived on now! Ah, _why_ did we ever meet?”

“No, no, darling, don’t blame yourself because I am dying! think of all my
self-love, my romanticism! I am to blame for all, myself! Did they ever
tell you my story in full? Do you remember, three years ago, there was a
criminal here sentenced to death? This man heard that a criminal was never
executed whilst ill! so he got hold of some wine, mixed tobacco in it, and
drank it. The effect was to make him so dreadfully sick, with
blood-spitting, that his lungs became affected; he was taken to a
hospital, and a few weeks after he died of virulent consumption! Well, on
that day, you know, after the letter, it struck me that I would do the
same; and why do you think I chose consumption? Because I was afraid of
any more sudden death? Perhaps. But, oh, Zina! believe me, a romantic
nonsense played a great part in it; at all events, I had an idea that it
would be striking and grand for me to be lying here, dying of consumption,
and you standing and wringing your hands for woe that _love_ should have
brought me to this! You should come, I thought, and beg my pardon on your
knees, and I should forgive you and die in your arms!”

“Oh, don’t! don’t!” said Zina, “don’t talk of it now, dear! you are not
really like that. Think of our happy days together, think of something
else—not that, not that!”

“Oh, but it’s so bitter to me, darling; and that’s why I must speak of it.
I havn’t seen you for a year and a half, you know, and all that time I
have been alone; and I don’t think there was one single minute of all that
time when I have not thought of you, my angel, Zina! And, oh! how I longed
to do something to earn a better opinion from you! Up to these very last
days I have never believed that I should really die; it has not killed me
all at once, you know. I have long walked about with my lungs affected.
For instance, I have longed to become a great poet suddenly, to publish a
poem such as has never appeared before on this earth; I intended to pour
my whole soul and being into it, so that wherever I was, or wherever _you_
were, I should always be with you and remind you of myself in my poems!
And my greatest longing of all was that you should think it all over and
say to yourself at last some day, ’No, he is not such a wretch as I
thought, after all!’ It was stupid of me, Zina, stupid—stupid—wasn’t it,
darling?”

“No, no, Vaísia—no!” cried Zina. She fell on his breast and kissed his
poor hot, dry hands.

“And, oh! how jealous I have been of you all this time, Zina! I think I
should have died if I had heard of your wedding. I kept a watch over you,
you know; I had a spy—there!” (he nodded towards his mother). “She used to
go over and bring me news. You never loved Mosgliakoff—now _did_ you,
Zina? Oh, my darling, my darling, will you remember me when I am dead? Oh,
I know you will; but years go by, Zina, and hearts grow cold, and yours
will cool too, and you’ll forget me, Zina!”

“No, no, never! I shall never marry. You are my first love, and my
only—only—undying love!”

“But all things die, Zina, even our memories, and our good and noble
feelings die also, and in their place comes reason. No, no, Zina, be
happy, and live long. Love another if you can, you cannot love a poor dead
man for ever! But think of me now and then, if only seldom; don’t think of
my faults: forgive them! For oh, Zina, there was good in that sweet love
of ours as well as evil. Oh, golden, golden days never to be recalled!
Listen, darling, I have always loved the sunset hour—remember me at that
time, will you? Oh no, no! why must I die? oh _how_ I should love to live
on now. Think of that time—oh, just think of it! it was all spring then,
the sun shone so bright, the flowers were so sweet, ah me! and look,
now—look!”

And the poor thin finger pointed to the frozen window-pane. Then he seized
Zina’s hand and pressed it tight over his eyes, and sighed
bitterly—bitterly! His sobs nearly burst his poor suffering breast.... And
so he continued suffering and talking all the long day. Zina comforted and
soothed him as she best could, but she too was full of deadly grief and
pain. She told him—she promised him—never to forget; that she would never
love again as she loved him; and he believed her and wept, and smiled
again, and kissed her hands. And so the day passed.

Meanwhile, Maria Alexandrovna had sent some ten times for Zina, begging
her not to ruin her reputation irretrievably. At last, at dusk, she
determined to go herself; she was out of her wits with terror and grief.

Having called Zina out into the next room, she proceeded to beg and pray
her, on her knees, “to spare this last dagger at her heart!”

Zina had come out from the sick-room ill: her head was on fire,—she heard,
but could not comprehend, what her mother said; and Marie Alexandrovna was
obliged to leave the house again in despair, for Zina had determined to
sit up all night with Vaísia.

She never left his bedside, but the poor fellow grew worse and worse.
Another day came, but there was no hope that the sick man would see its
close. His old mother walked about as though she had lost all control of
her actions; grief had turned her head for the time; she gave her son
medicines, but he would none of them! His death agony dragged on and on!
He could not speak now, and only hoarse inarticulate sounds proceeded from
his throat. To the very last instant he stared and stared at Zina, and
never took his eyes off her; and when their light failed them he still
groped with uncertain fingers for her hand, to press and fondle it in his
own!

Meanwhile the short winter day was waning! And when at even the last
sunbeam gilded the frozen window-pane of the little room, the soul of the
sufferer fled in pursuit of it out of the emaciated body that had kept it
prisoner.

The old mother, seeing that there was nothing left her now but the
lifeless body of her beloved Vaísia, wrung her hands, and with a loud cry
flung herself on his dead breast.

“This is your doing, you viper, you cursed snake,” she yelled to Zina, in
her despair; “it was you ruined and killed him, you wicked, wretched
girl.” But Zina heard nothing. She stood over the dead body like one
bereft of her senses.

At last she bent over him, made the sign of the Cross, kissed him, and
mechanically left the room. Her eyes were ablaze, her head whirled. Two
nights without sleep, combined with her turbulent feelings, were almost
too much for her reason; she had a sort of confused consciousness that all
her past had just been torn out of her heart, and that a new life was
beginning for her, dark and threatening.

But she had not gone ten paces when Mosgliakoff suddenly seemed to start
up from the earth at her feet.

He must have been waiting for her here.

“Zenaida Afanassievna,” he began, peering all around him in what looked
like timid haste; it was still pretty light. “Zenaida Afanassievna, of
course I am an ass, or, if you please, perhaps not quite an ass, for I
really think I am acting rather generously this time. Excuse my
blundering, but I am rather confused, from a variety of causes.”

Zina glanced at him almost unconsciously, and silently went on her way.
There was not much room for two on the narrow pavement, and as Zina did
not make way for Paul, the latter was obliged to walk on the road at the
side, which he did, never taking his eyes off her face.

“Zenaida Afanassievna,” he continued, “I have thought it all over, and if
you are agreeable I am willing to renew my proposal of marriage. I am even
ready to forget all that has happened; all the ignominy of the last two
days, and to forgive it—but on one condition: that while we are still here
our engagement is to remain a strict secret. You will depart from this
place as soon as ever you can, and I shall quietly follow you. We will be
married secretly, somewhere, so that nobody shall know anything about it;
and then we’ll be off to St. Petersburg by express post—don’t take more
than a small bag—eh? What say you, Zenaida Afanassievna; tell me quick,
please, I can’t stay here. We might be seen together, you know.”

Zina did not answer a word; she only looked at Mosgliakoff; but it was
such a look that he understood all instantly, bowed, and disappeared down
the next lane.

“Dear me,” he said to himself, “what’s the meaning of this? The day before
yesterday she became so jolly humble, and blamed herself all round. I’ve
come on the wrong day, evidently!”

Meanwhile event followed event in Mordasof.

A very tragical circumstance occurred.

The old prince, who moved over to the hotel with Mosgliakoff, fell very
ill that same night, dangerously ill. All Mordasof knew of it in the
morning; the doctor never left his side. That evening a consultation of
all the local medical talent was held over the old man (the invitations to
which were issued in Latin); but in spite of the Latin and all they could
do for him, the poor prince was quite off his head; he raved and asked his
doctor to sing him some ballad or other; raved about wigs, and
occasionally cried out as though frightened.

The Mordasof doctors decided that the hospitality of the town had given
the prince inflammation of the stomach, which had somehow “gone to the
head.”

There might be some subordinate moral causes to account for the attack;
but at all events he ought to have died long ago; and so he would
certainly die now.

In this last conclusion they were not far wrong; for the poor old prince
breathed his last three days after, at the hotel.

This event impressed the Mordasof folk considerably. No one had expected
such a tragical turn of affairs. They went in troops to the hotel to view
the poor old body, and there they wagged their heads wisely and ended by
passing severe judgment upon “the murderers of the unfortunate
Prince,”—meaning thereby, of course, Maria Alexandrovna and her daughter.
They predicted that this matter would go further. Mosgliakoff was in a
dreadful state of perturbation: he did not know what to do with the body.
Should he take it back to Donchanof! or what? Perhaps he would be held
responsible for the old man’s death, as he had brought him here? He did
not like the look of things. The Mordasof people were less than useless
for advice, they were all far too frightened to hazard a word.

But suddenly the scene changed.

One fine evening a visitor arrived—no less a person than the eminent
Prince Shepetiloff, a young man of thirty-five, with colonel’s epaulettes,
a relative of the dead man. His arrival created a great stir among all
classes at Mordasof.

It appeared that this gentleman had lately left St. Petersburg, and had
called in at Donchanof. Finding no one there, he had followed the prince
to Mordasof, where the news and circumstances of the old man’s death fell
upon him like a thunder-clap!

Even the governor felt a little guilty while detailing the story of the
prince’s death: all Mordasof felt and looked guilty.

This visitor took the matter entirely into his own hands, and Mosgliakoff
made himself scarce before the presence of the prince’s real nephew, and
disappeared, no one knew whither.

The body was taken to the monastery, and all the Mordasof ladies flocked
thither to the funeral. It was rumoured that Maria Alexandrovna was to be
present, and that she was to go on her knees before the coffin, and loudly
pray for pardon; and that all this was in conformity with the laws of the
country.

Of course this was all nonsense, and Maria Alexandrovna never went near
the place!

I forgot to state that the latter had carried off Zina to the country
house, not deeming it possible to continue to live in the town. There she
sat, and trembled over all the second-hand news she could get hold of as
to events occurring at Mordasof.

The funeral procession passed within half a mile of her country house; so
that Maria Alexandrovna could get a good view of the long train of
carriages looking black against the white snow roads; but she could not
bear the sight, and left the window.

Before the week was out, she and her daughter moved to Moscow, taking
Afanassy Matveyevitch with them; and, within a month, the country house
and town house were both for sale.

And so Mordasof lost its most eminent inhabitant for ever!

Afanassy Matveyevitch was said to be for sale with the country house.

A year—two years went by, and Mordasof had quite forgotten Maria
Alexandrovna, or nearly so! Alas! so wags the world! It was said that she
had bought another estate, and had moved over to some other provincial
capital; where, of course, she had everybody under her thumb; that Zina
was not yet married; and that Afanassy Matveyevitch—but why repeat all
this nonsense? None of it was true; it was but rumour!——

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

It is three years since I wrote the last words of the above chronicles of
Mordasof, and whoever would have believed that I should have to unfold my
MS., and add another piece of news to my narrative?

Well, to business!—

Let’s begin with Paul Mosgliakoff.—After leaving Mordasof, he went
straight to St. Petersburg, where he very soon obtained the clerkship he
had applied for. He then promptly forgot all about Mordasof, and the
events enacted there. He enjoyed life, went into society, fell in love,
made another offer of marriage, and had to swallow another snub; became
disgusted with Petersburg life, and joined an expedition to one of the
remote quarters of our vast empire.

This expedition passed through its perils of land and water, and arrived
in due course at the capital of the remote province which was its
destination.

There the members were well received by the governor, and a ball was
arranged for their entertainment.

Mosgliakoff was delighted. He donned his best Petersburg uniform, and
proceeded to the large ball-room with the full intention of producing a
great and startling effect. His first duty was to make his bow to the
governor-general’s lady, of whom it was rumoured that she was young, and
very lovely.

He advanced then, with some little “swagger,” but was suddenly rooted to
the spot with amazement. Before him stood Zina, beautifully dressed, proud
and haughty, and sparkling with diamonds! She did not recognize him; her
eyes rested a moment on his face, and then passed on to glance at some
other person.

Paul immediately departed to a safe and quiet corner, and there
button-holed a young civilian whom he questioned, and from whom he learned
certain most interesting facts. He learned that the governor-general had
married a very rich and very lovely lady in Moscow, two years since; that
his wife was certainly very beautiful, but, at the same time, excessively
proud and haughty, and danced with none but generals. That the governor’s
lady had a mother, a lady of rank and fashion, who had followed them from
Moscow; that this lady was very clever and wise, but that even she was
quite under the thumb of her daughter; as for the general (the governor),
he doted on his wife.

Mosgliakoff inquired after our old friend Afanassy; but in their “remote
province” nothing was known of that gentleman.

Feeling a little more at home presently, Paul began to walk about the
room, and shortly espied Maria Alexandrovna herself. She was wonderfully
dressed, and was surrounded by a bevy of ladies who evidently dwelt in the
glory of her patronage: she appeared to be exceedingly amiable to
them—wonderfully so!

Paul plucked up courage and introduced himself. Maria Alexandrovna seemed
to give a shudder at first sight of him, but in an instant she was herself
again. She was kind enough to recognise Paul, and to ask him all sorts of
questions as to his Petersburg experiences, and so on. She never said a
word about Mordasof, however. She behaved as though no such place existed.

After a minute or so, and having dropped a question as to some Petersburg
prince whom Paul had never so much as heard of, she turned to speak to
another young gentleman standing by, and in a second or two was entirely
oblivious of Mosgliakoff. With a sarcastic smile our friend passed on into
the large hall. Feeling offended—though he knew not why—he decided not to
dance. So he leant his back against one of the pillars, and for a couple
of hours did nothing but follow Zina about with his eyes. But alas! all
the grace of his figure and attitude, and all the fascinations of his
general appearance were lost upon her, she never looked at him.

At last, with legs stiff from standing, tired, hungry, and feeling
miserable generally, he went home. Here he tossed about half the night
thinking of the past, and next morning, having the chance of joining a
branch party of his expedition, he accepted the opportunity with delight,
and left the town at once.

The bells tinkled, the horses trotted gaily along, kicking up snowballs as
they went. Paul Mosgliakoff fell to thinking, then he fell to snoring, and
so he continued until the third station from the start; there he awoke
fresh and jolly, and with the new scenery came newer, and healthier, and
pleasanter thoughts.
